When did Virgin Australia start operating?
Which is a species of fish? Tope or Rope
Why can camels survive for long without water?
Alice's parents have three daughters: Amy, Jessy, and what’s the name of the third daughter?
When was Tomoaki Komorida born?
If I have more pieces at the time of stalemate, have I won?
Given a reference text about Lollapalooza, where does it take place, who started it and what is it?
Who gave the UN the land in NY to build their HQ
Why mobile is bad for human
Who was John Moses Browning?
Who is Thomas Jefferson?
Who was Kyle Van Zyl playing against when he scored 36 of hisa teams 61 points?
From the passage list down the areas for which Dar es Salaam is Tanzania's most prominent city. List the results in comma separated format.
What is a polygon?
How do I start running?
Which episodes of season four of Game of Thrones did Michelle MacLaren direct?
What is process mining?
What are some unique curtain tie backs that you can make yourself?
What is a dispersive prism?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cantaro, Gudok
Give me the top 5 golf equipment company names.
What individual has won the most Olympic gold medals in the history of the games?
Which Dutch artist painted “Girl with a Pearl Earring”?
What happens when the sun goes down?
What is a verb?
Extract the owner of Lamborghini and a listing of the different types of Huracan cars that Lamborghini has produced for its Motorsport division.
Which of the following is useful for transportation: a glass of wine, a lamp, a train, an iced cube tray, a plane, a bicycle, an apple and a scooter.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Panduri, Zurna
What is the average lifespan of a Golden Retriever?
Who became king of Holland in 1806?
What is best Playstation or Xbox
Who played Billy the Kid in The Left Handed Gun
why did Syd Barrett left the Pink Floyd?
what is REST API
What is underwriting?
Give me a list of some characteristics of a good coffee shop?
Please summarize what Linkedin does.
Who saved Andromeda from the sea monster
How can I contribute to Spark?
Who are ''The Lumières" ?
Using examples taken from the text give me a summary of the main arguments in favour of slavery reparations in the United States and the anticipated cost of enacting such reparations
When was the wheel invented?
write a scene between two actors discussing movie Inception
Did dinosaurs have lips?
Are lilies safe for cats?
What is Sunshine Recession?
What is the currency in use in the Netherlands?
What is the best tv series in the world
Who was the first to record the Needles and Pins song?
Provide me a list of the different types of harnesses used in rock climbing
Think of some family rules to promote a healthy family relationship
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Karstark?
What is enriched air and why would divers dive with enriched air?
What film won the 1943 Oscar as best film
which weighs more, cold or hot water?
Given this paragraph, what is the top speed of a Kia Stinger?
Write a short paragraph about why you should not have both a pet cat and a pet bird.
What is your favorite strip from the comic Calvin and Hobbes?
What makes a formula one car so fast?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of the history of the Key Lime Pie.
What is LAPR?
Is beauty objective or subjective?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kpanlogo, Shamisen
Why do potato chip bags become stale after opening?
Classify each of the following as a primary color or a secondary color
Where are the British Virgin Islands (BVI) and which islands are a part of the BVI?
Does "outbreeding" or "inbreeding" benefit the offspring more?
What is the future for human?
Name some of the bravolebrities from Vanderpump Rules
Name some famous rock bands from the 1960s
Who is Muhammad Ejaz Shafi
Who invented the telephone?
Who are the Smiths?
Give me five ways in which I can make my homebrew beer more interesting
How many Grammy Awards has Bad Bunny won?
When was the first Reading railway station opened?
What is HiFI?
What is a brown eared pheasant?
Which of these are rappers? Eminem, Michael Jackson, Rihanna, 50 Cent
Is it true that Lewis Hamilton won the championship in his first F1 season?
What are some kinds of embroidery stitches for writing letters?
What are the most common injuries in rowing?
What is a kite?
Classify each of the following pieces of equipment according to the sport they are used for, either basketball, football, or soccer: shin guards, shooting sleeve, penalty flag, corner flag, kicking tee, and goalie gloves.
Given this paragraph about Billie Eilish, tell me who produced her debut single, also tell me what is her chart-topping single?
What is a good way to get around without a car?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Palaeophis, Giant Tortoise
Why is Santa Cruz, California a great place to live?
Give me some ideas to manage my manager.
Who was boxer John Baldwin
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Samphor, Viola toeria
If we were playing a game where we had to identify things that can be found inside a house, which of these would we call out: car, chair, table, park, cloud, microwave.
Classify the following as either dark-colored beers or light colored beers: porter, pilsner, stout, amber, lager
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 highest mountains in the world and their respective heights in meters
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Which products apple sell?
Write a short story about a person who discovers a hidden room in their house. The story should include a plot twist and a clear resolution at the end.
Please describe  what is oil and give me a list of it’s applications.
List 6 different types of rain in Seattle
What is investment banking?
I started a new company named Greystone Inc. What do we do?
Tell me whether or not these foods are on EWG's dirty dozen list
How much music theory knowledge is required to compose music?
Categorize each of the following instruments as either string or keyboard: Guitar, Violin, piano, harmonium, cello, accordion, banjo
Summarize in one sentence this article about a famous song.
What is the Maareech Advanced Torpedo Defence System (ATDS)?
Change the following passage to past tense
What is the tallest mountain in the continental US?
Who is Shoji Hashimoto?
What are some of the best comedy movies of the 1980's?
In golf what do the Americans call an albatross
What are common ingredients of a full english breakfast?
Plan for a three day road trip for May long weekend from Westfield, New Jersey
How do you operate a car with a manual transmission?
What is the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB)?
What are 5 potential uses for an empty La Croix can?
What is the name of the Winslow's nerdy next-door neighbor on the TV show "Family Matters"?
Why are so many US Hollywood films made in the state of Georgia?
How many managers have Arsenal had?
What is SVM?
What is the current capital of Japan?
What are some tools that every homeowner should have?
What is an apple?
write a short essay on California wild fire
Tell me about the 2017 Southeastern Conference football season
Who scored first in Austin FC's first victory in a home game in the 2021 MLS season?
Classify each of the following as either a bird, animal, reptile or insect: tiger, heron, eagle, alligator, snake, spider, ant, dog, cat, rhinoceros, kingfisher, chameleon, hornet, butterfly
What are some different things you should bring with you on a day hiking trip?
How long does it take for a mustard seed to germinate?
Which is a species of fish? Sea dragon or Red bearded
Categorize where each of these household items belong: bed, couch, desk
Separate the following suburbs into those that border, and do not border, the Brisbane River: Indooroopilly, Bulimba, St Lucia, Newstead, Wilston, West End, Toowong, Bowen Hills and, Wooloongabba.
What are AirPods?
What is the difference between pets and cattle?
How do I put a bouquet of fresh flowers in a vase?
What should I do on a free afternoon in San Francisco?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Janzi, Gemshorn
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Pliosaur, Marine Iguana
What is the origin of the name of the herb Rosemary?
Classify each of the following as either a title by Isaac Asimov or Jules Verne: Pebble in the Sky, The Stars, Like Dust, Foundation, The Robots of Dawn, The Naked Sun, Around the World in Eighty Days, From the Earth to the Moon, Martin Paz, Journey to the Centre of the Earth, A Drama in the Air
Wat id DNA annotation?
Who were Jaehaerys I Targaryen's children?
In SQL, how can I filter table rows based on a column condition?
Who were the ten best baseball players in the history of the Boston Red Sox?
What makes the world go around?
Who coined the phrase "Bike-shedding" and when?
Who is the best Formula 1 driver
What is Share capital in finance?
Give me some Mother's Day gift ideas.
Give me a list of ways that a runner can advance a base in baseball without there being a hit.
What are the types of RVs?
List the weapons of Goddess Durga in a comma separated manner.
What shapes are made up of straight lines?
Choose the word which is different from the rest: hangar, platform, dock, park, bus stand
Are The Smiths a good band?
What is an EV?
Given a reference text about Run Towards the Danger, tell me how many essays are part of the collection.
Name 10 colors
What is game of Cricket?
How much of American wine is produced in California?
As a golfer, how can I fix my slice?
Who tends to participates in hackathons?
Which community of users on Twitter has the most 8-dollar-a-month verification?
Tell me whether these people are DJs or singers: David Guetta, Avicii, Rihanna, Beyonce, Martin Garrix, Calvin Harris, Taylor Swift
What’s a typical dish in Brazil?
How should I invest my money?
Where is the village of Congosto
Name the three best professional sports teams based in California.
What is Marketing Automation?
What are some ways to improve the value of your home?
Tell me an idea for a film based off of the cartoon movie Cars but incorporate self-driving cars.
Which American president spoke Dutch as their first language?
How many planets are there?
Help me come up with 3 ideas for a new business and how I can start it
Tomb of Sand  was translated from Hindi to English by
What is more important in society, freedom or safety?
Given this reference text about the consumption of peanut butter, when is national peanut butter day?
What are good activities for two year old boys?
How many compute services does Azure Synapse have?
What does fasting mean?
How many times Lewis Hamilton won the F1 Championship ?
What happens when you bring flammable objects closer to a fire source or extreme heat?
Give me a list of the last five european golden boots winner And tell me how many goals they scored.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Den-den daiko, Luc huyen cam
Pick if these would be useful or not useful for a high school student to put in their backpack. Notebooks, textbook, desk lamp, pencil pouch, beach ball, pillow, laptop.
What is the largest city on the Mississippi River?
What is the city of Denver like?
Provide a list of all numbers mentioned in the provided text and what they represent
What are the differences between the New York Giants and New York Jets?
Was Furze Hill an established community in the 19th century?
Should you buy new golf clubs when you are a beginner?
Why should I use fabric softener?
The former Chairman of Tata Sons died in road accident  en route  from where?
Please classify each of the following animals as mammal, amphibian, or fish: elk, frog, dog, cat, newt, and human.
Classify the following numbers as 'prime' or 'composite' - 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Summarize the rulers of the territory of Albania in this time period.
What is cloud computing in simple terms?
What is one year?
What types of sport fish do most anglers target in New England?
Give me a bunch of ways I can keep my house cool in the summer
What is wine?
Are the following items candy bars or gum: trident, Twix, hubba bubba, snickers, three musketeers, and wrigleys.
What's the relation between the Kushan Empire and the Sassanid Empire in Iran?
Give me a list of things that pose a challenge to cryptos
What is the meaning of life?
Classify the below characters based on whether they are created by Marvel comics or D.C. comics
 Spider-Man, Iron Man, Captain America, Thor, Doctor Strange, Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, Flash, Aquaman
Why are we like aquariums?
Give me a bulleted list of countries that start with the letter B.
Explain how new technologies, like LLMs and ChatGPT, may revolutionize Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) in the future. Provide an example of how these APIs might work.
Who are some of the most successful golfers in history?
Which is a bird or fish: Red-throated diver, Redlip blenny
Which types of fish contain the lowest levels of mercury?
How do you make an iced matcha latter?
What is world of warcraft
What is the best swimming form?
Which is the best place to Kayak in Austin?
Who is the best men's test cricket player to have come from New Zealand?
What is the winter weather like in Salt Lake City, Utah?
Whats the difference between a bass guitar and a regular guitar?
What is a Gross domestic product (GDP)?
What is the last festival celebrated in Tihar and how long does the festival last?
What event John Johnstone won as a rider?
What are the careers of your dream?
Let's imagine I create a fake currency called Yarns with two types of coins: a super-yarn (worth 10 yarns) and a mini-yarn (worth 0.5 yarn). How much money do I have in total if I have 2 super-yarns and three mini-yarns?
What is a Mormon?
What is the difference between a red delicious and a Granny Smith apple?
List the Pokemon Go regions.
Who do you think is the most powerful Mandalorian in Star Wars history?
Based on the following passage summarise how sunsets are viewed from the northern hemisphere across seasons.
What cities should someone visit during a trip to Morocco?
Which classical composer was deaf?
Who discovered the double-helix DNA structure?
Please provide a brief summary describing Canada
Why age 27 is given so much importance specially in Music industry?
What is Bollywood
What are Nanotube?
Write the first paragraph of a blog post describing the appeal of Boston as a tourist destination
What is a secured loan?
Should I have Kids?
Give me 3 ideas for hobbies that I can recommend to somebody who is retiring. These should all be activities that require gentle movement and are not overly demanding on the body.
Name some reasons it's great to live in Marin County, California.
Who was the first American to win a Nobel Peace?
What is the FA Cup?
Are Schindler elevators safe
What are the 4 oceans on earth
Did Harry Potter put his own name in the goblet of fire?
Why does it help to focus on the breath when practicing mindfulness?
What's the best way to learn how to snowboard?
What was Angie Thomas's first published novel?
Based on this paragraph, how many younger siblings did Kennedy have?
What are some of the common elements of visual design?
What is the difference between a shrub and a tree?
As an expert skier, what are the top resorts in the US to go skiing?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Hulk, Spectre
Extract why Tim Lincecum was called "The Freak"
Which players won the men's singles grand slam tennis tournaments in 2022.
Can you tell me something about Stanley J. Goldberg
Please summarize the causes and cure for color blindness given in the passage?
How can I improve my finances?
What is Zenthoefer Furs
What are the three branches of the US Federal Government?
When rock climbing, what is the difference between lead climbing and top rope climbing?
Which is a species of fish? Mola mola or Molar
Imagine a world where life expectancy is fixed and the same for everyone at birth, yet people can engage in life expectancy "donation" – meaning that someone can extend your life three years longer at the expense of theirs. Talk about a likely scenario in this world that involves manipulated, coerced donation.
What makes a good sales account executive?
Which of the following are colors: red, black, yellow, orange, sun, sunflower, chips, book, white, pink, blue, keyboard.
Think up some openings for beginners to the game of Chess
Give me a list of popular current artists in the EDM category.
Which sports would be easiest to find success in if you’re not tall: baseball, soccer, basketball, bowling.
What is the appeal of Flathead Lake as a Summer vacation destination?
What's the difference between tennis and pickleball?
What is Linux?
Given a reference text about Jen Shah, what is she famous from, when was she criminally charged, what was the verdict, and when was she sentenced.
What are the classifications of Academic Degrees?
What types of problems in government could AI be used to solve
Why isn't multi-threading making my Python code faster? How can I fix it.
Who is the best NBA player of all time?
Classify each as either a vodka drink or a gin drink: Screwdriver, Bloody Mary, French 75, White Russian, Gimlet, Cosmopolitan, Tom Collins, Negroni
How can I get better performance when querying a delta table?
Which coin of U.S currency has the most ridges.
Who was the first woman to have four country albums reach No. 1 on the Billboard 200?
From the passage provided, extract the state Lincoln was born in
What is FIFA?
why is Mahatma Gandhi loved by everyone?
What is Game of Thrones based on?
What are the benefits of collaborating on a tech blog with your customers?
Given this paragraph, how many public high schools are in Arlington, Virginia?
What are all of the professional baseball teams in the state of Florida?
Given the reference text about the Cy Young Award, please describe what the award is and why it is awarded.
Extract what is Top Gun
Where to find the best croissant in San Francisco?
Do cats have nine lives?
What is Microsoft?
How do you make soap?
How would I get from an upstairs apartment to the parking garage?
What are three most commonly sung lyric soprano arias?
Cases of Anthrax were found in Kerala in which animals?
Categorize the following Taylor Swift songs based on what album they are in: The Archer, tolerate it, Lover, Love Story (Taylor's Version), Bejeweled, Don't Blame Me, 22 (Taylor's version), Look What You Made Me Do, Lavender Haze, willow, Cruel Summer
I'm creating a class to explain to kids the difference between items that are powered and can be plugged in and items that aren't. Please divide the following things into those you can plug in and those that you can't: table, hairdryer, television, chair, computer, fridge, comb, flowers.
Can you describe what team effectiveness is?
From the passage below, extract the names of the companies and technologies that Walmart has acquired over the last 3 years.
Tell whether these are countries, cities, continents or neither: Australia, Mexico, Mexico city, Antartica, Singapore, India, Gulf, Beijing, Jakarta, Luxembourg, Vatican City
Why do people like gardening?
I am on a week long vacation to India and specifically want to explore Himalayan state of Himachal Pradesh. How should I plan my trip ?
From the passage provided, extract the second studio album that Taylor Swift released.
Is there a World Taekwondo Grand Prix
Based on the provided text, place the following books in chronological order: 
The Fox in the Attic, In Hazard: A Sea Story, A High Wind in Jamaica, and The Wooden Shepherdess
What is the best way to invest my money?
Do George Lucas and Steven Spielberg know each other?
Give me a list of the best bravo tv shows
What are the official languages of the United Nations?
What type of weather is San Francisco famous for?
What makes for a good photograph?
What's the game engine used by Bethesda before Creation Engine? And what's the last game make with it?
From the passage provided, extract the languages in which Kishore Kumar provided his vocals as a playback singer. Separate them with a comma.
What are some movies that star Will Ferrell?
What is the plot of Harry Potter?
What is the old name for The Go Between Bridge?
Can I make chocolate at home?
How did Alfred Nobel make his money
What is the Trans Tahoe Relay?
When was the 8088 processor released?
How do you prepare for case study interview for digital transformation case?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Wheelharp, Clarinet
Which country makes the best coffee in the world?
Based on the reference text about Bitcoin, how many countries have banned Bitcoin?
What was the Underground Railroad?
Given this paragraph on LeBron James' early career, when did he win his first NBA MVP?
What are the best social media sites
How many musicians performed in the world's largest rock band?
How has the video gaming industry evolved over the years ?
Give me a list of recommendations to quickly heal from an achilles rupture surgery.
Which team was relegated from the league at the conclusion of the 1991 Season?
What percussion instruments are easy to learn?
Tell me whether these cities are in Texas: Austin, Houston, New York, Chicago, Miami, Dallas
Name all the books in the Harry Potter collection
Tell me whether you drive on the right or left side of the road in these countries: USA, Mexico, Spain, England, New Zealand, Japan
Why should we ban artificial sweeteners like aspartame?
Give me some ideas of kids items to stuff into Easter eggs.
I'm going to give you a passage from Marty Essen's book "Cool Creatures, Hot Planet: Exploring the Seven Continents" and want you to answer the following question: Where are western Hermann's tortoises found?

After spending the night at a large chain hotel, Deb and I traveled southeast with tortoises on our mind. Our plan for the day was to infiltrate the Massif des Maures area and search for one of France's most endangered reptiles-- the western Hermann's tortoise.  The first stop of our quest was Le Village de Tortues (the Tortoise Village), a tortoise rehabilitation center near the town of Gonfaron. Our mission was to befriend a staff member, learn as much as we could, and get detailed information on tracking down the wily Hermann's tortoise in the wild. When we couldn't find an English-speaking staff member, our mission was nearly thwarted. Only through quick thinking and improvisation were we able to acquire the vital background information we needed. Okay - we utilized the signs provided for British visitors. For many people, the word tortoise invokes thoughts of giant four-foot-long Galapagos tortoises. Western Hermann's tortoises, on the other hand, are small, reaching a maximum length of eight inches. While both reptiles make the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, the Galapagos tortoise is listed as "vulnerable" and the western Hermann's is listed as "endangered." In France, habitat destruction, egg pilfering, and fire are the primary factors for the tortoises decline.
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Opel, GMC
What are the top reasons to become a vegan?
If each client was served by the same number of professionals, how many professionals (round to one decimal place) would each client be served by?
Why do cooks use kosher salt?
When was Lamb Air operating
What is the PGA Championship?
What fruits and vegetables are grown in lower-lying areas of Kenya?
Is Paris a good city to live in?
How are weather forecasts created?
Since when did the SR22 include a glass cockpit
Give me a bulleted list of the first ten MacOS (operating system) versions.
What do you know about the city of Aberdeen in Scotland?
What is the English Premier League?
Classify the following types of cars as "economy" or "luxury": Ford, Chevrolet, Lamborghini, Ferrari, Mercedes, Honda, Lexus, Toyota, Nissan, Subaru
Please list down some key points  regarding governance system of Portland from the given text
Which river can you hike in Utah?
What is predictive maintenance?
Who are N-Dubz?
Write a haiku about how much I love pickles.
What is Terraform?
What are the two longest rivers located in the United States?
What are the words of House Reed?
What movies won best picture Oscars the last 5 years
Classify each of the following grades as being in elementary or high school: 10th grade, 3rd grade, 4th grade, 12th grade, 1st grade.
Why is Brazilian jiu jitsu an excellent martial art?
What is Cup Game?
Which is a bird or fish: Blackchin, Black redstart
Let’s solve the following math problem. Each rabbit has 4 feets and each duck has 2 feets. If there are in total 25 heads and 88 feets, how many rabbits and how many ducks are there?
Classify the following water bodies into oceans, seas, rivers and lakes- aral, pacific, baikal, superior, amazon, colorado, indian, arabian, north, baltic, okhotosk, tahoe, victoria, lena, danube, arctic, mekong
From the passage find the list of banks who supported Yes Bank in 2020. Display the results in comma separated format.
What is WestWorld?
Best beach vacation in the world
From the paragraph, tell me what is the fourth longest natural arch in the world
What city in the United States is known for its Mardi Gras celebrations?
Give me three ideas for a fun dinner party
Why are dogs generally more popular than cats as pets?
What is Nando's?
What does Cisco specialize in, what technology markets do they address, and what are their most successful products?
Sally has 2 chickens, 3 cows and 2 motorcycles. Doug has 6 monkeys, 12 pigs and 2 tractors. Amy has 1 car, 10 cows and 6 ducks. How many farm animals do Sally, Doug and Amy have in total?
Why is nitrogen gas used during the packaging of potato chips?
What are the causes for Sensory processing disorder?
What is the greatest movie of all time?
What is cryptocurrency?
According to this text, when did Disney become a public company?
Which of the following are ice cream toppings and which are salad dressings: thousand island, chocolate sauce, hot fudge, balsamic vinaigrette, whipped cream, and Caesar.
Where did Gretel attend primary school?
Which of these are car brands: Ferrari, Fiat, Batavus, Philips, Renault, BMW, IKEA and MG
In the United States of America, which state is the largest in size?
Tell me whether each of these are animals or not: Alligator, Grass, Tree, Boat, Dolphin, Shark, Fish, Fence, Dog, Car
Is skiing or snowboarding easier?
What was the Counter Reformation?
What is time series data?
Cauliflower rice is not that fun to eat in its bland form. Is there anything interesting and tasty I can cook with cauliflower rice?
Given a reference text about Psychiatry: An Industry of Death, tell me when it opened and and who owns and operates it.
How to raise a kitten?
What is engineering culture?
Who are the pianists that are considered masters in playing Bach's music?
Categorize these movies that came out in 1999 as cartoons or live-action: The Matrix, Stuart Little, Cruel Intentions, The Iron Giant, The Blair Witch Project, South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut, The Sixth Sense
How are cats different than dogs?
What dog breed is a mix between a Cocker Spaniel and a Poodle?
What is the name of the largest red-light district in Amsterdam?
Why do people move to California?
Discuss at least two risks associated with scraping data from websites. Describe steps an analyst could take to mitigate those risks.
What is Brdinje
How are tornadoes formed?
Which ones are programming languages, out of C, Java, Node.js, Python, HTML, BigData, Spark?
Give me a bulleted list of the the first five books in the bible old testament?
What type of cheeses can you use to make a grilled cheese sandwich.
What is the tiny piece at the end of a shoelace called?
What links Brazil, Uruguay, Mozambique and Angola
What the the effects of houseplants?
Who were the original 5 members of the Grateful Dead?
How is the The U.S. Naturalization Interview and test done?
What is Magical Thinking?
List top 5 people with most silver medals in the olympics
Based on this paragraph, how many times has Joe Biden run for president and what characteristics make him unique among all past presidents?
What articles of clothes are often worn by people in summer months?
Which Dutch actress played Xenia Onatopp in the James Bond movie GoldenEye?
Which of the 10 largest earthquakes was the deadliest?
Give me some tips on how to train for a marathon.
Extract the names of the cities and rank them in alphabetical order?
Write a guide for how to catch a smallmouth bass.
Which ones are metals and non metals: Copper, Hydrogen, Silver, Carbon, Gold, Nitrogen
Write a funny and whimsical horoscope reading
From the passage provided, extract the date when the 34th Wisconsin Infantry Regiment was organized.
How did Robert Baratheon die?
For the Zodiac sign Aries, Share some information from the given text.
Without quoting from the text, can you summarise from wikipedia who Denis-Benjamin Viger was?
What is the best language in the world
Tell me whether these are movies or film Directors: Sholay, Satyajit Ray, Mani Ratnam, Lagaan, Yash Chopra, Roja
How do you improve your basketball handles?
What is the future trend of job industry
How do I cast on a knitting project?
Why do Filipinos like eating rice so much?
What are the benefits of division of labour?
According to the paragraph below, what is Generative AI?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pambai, Steel Guitar
What mammal lays the largest eggs?
Increased money supply (i.e. money printing)
What is CBT?
What is appealing about Charleston in South Carolina?
Give me a list of nice board games to play with friends
Where is Shuyga?
What's the best way to cook a soft-boiled egg?
What is "diglossia"?
Give me a bulleted list of the three most recent prime ministers of India
How would you categorize the following sports into two groups; baseball, archery, decathlon, hockey
What is the second oldest ballpark in Major League Baseball?
What are some types of potatoes commonly grown in Ireland?
How do you know if you reached product market fit?
What are index funds?
How to calculate growth rate?
Name 10 of Kris Jenner's Grandchildren
Categorize each of the following as either 'spicy', 'not spicy' or 'sometimes spicy': jalapenos, chilis, sriracha, chips, pizza, cocktails, fruit, milk
What is the Turkish drink that tastes similar to
How many campgrounds does Shenandoah National Park have?
Who was the first women to do the spacewalk?
Tell me whether each South Park character is a kid or adult: Randy, Stan, Kyle, Butters, Sharon
What is the kiwi bird?
What is Unified Payments Interface (UPI) in India
What is a spiral staircase?
Miles Davis, Rhianna, Elton John, John Coltrane, Taylor Swift, Amy Winehouse, Elvis, Billy Holiday. These are all musicians - list which of these are jazz musicians, and which are not.
Extract the criticisms that modern portfolio theory faces from this link https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_portfolio_theory, place them in a bullet list
Give me a list of things I can do with a bunch of extra money.
Which is considered the first human technology?
Given this paragraph about the Cold War, why did the Soviets pull out of their war in Afghanistan?
Why did the Seattle Supersonics leave Seattle?
Which of the following words starts with the letter S: Snake, Towel, Table, Shower, Yam, Butterfly, Apple
What does the Gini coefficient measure?
Give me some facts about Ethiopia?
What are the advantages to studying Engineering in college?
According to the text below about UVA, name the UVA alumni that have won the Pulitzer Prize.
Summarize the Challenger Sales Methodology for me
Who are the three team managers that hold the record for the most appearances in the FIFA Club World Cup final?
Give me a bulleted list of the last 5 Super Bowl winning teams
Explain how a mechanical watch works
Classify these objects based on their shape.
wheel, coin, CD, stamp, chess board
Why are all the planets and moons round in shape? What makes them round? Does there exist another shape?
what are the advantages of having a vegetable garden at home on the owners health?
Can you tell me recipe to make a quick dessert , tell me one which is your favorite.
The album the ways to love a man by Tammy Wynette
Where to visit in Brazil?
which are rainbow colours violet red orange purple indigo pink blue black white yellow  green grey
What are some of the most common activities during winter in cold weather climates?
Who is Cindy Robinson?
Does Palmeiras have a Fifa club world cup?
Given a reference text about Gennady Petrovich Lyachin, tell me when he joined the navy and when he was decommissioned.
How many cats did Freddie Mercury have?
Walter Koenig played which part in the Star Trek series
Write critical success factors for a proposal to a company called ABC for an Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) effort
Extract the reason why was Mark Hunt known as the King of Walk Offs
Monitor and Merrimac refer to what in the passage?
Could you write a poem about a standing desk?
Classify each of the following as either titles by J.K. Rowling or Suzanne Collins: Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, The Ickabog, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, The Cuckoo's Calling, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, Catching Fire, Mockingjay, Gregor the Overlander, Year of the Jungle, The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes
What is the largest city in Washington state?
Tell me which months have 30 days and which have 31 days, based on this list: January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, and December.
List down important points about prisoners and events from the given passage
What is the largest or biggest land animal?
What is the current reigning dynasty of Thailand?
What criteria should I be looking at when buying a new motorcycle?
What are the ten best restaurants in London?
Is it a gas, liquid, or solid
Are plastic bags and containers bad for the environment?
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of an idle mind?
What is an actuary?
Tell me wether these are cities, or states? IL, chicago, Texas, Fremont, Washington, Washington DC, san jose, bay area
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sabar, Sharud
What is the fastest car?
When is India's independence day?
Who won the 63rd staging of the Limerick Senior Hurling Championship?
Give me a list of 10 different SciFi movies and which year they were released
When did Hungary gain its independence?
Why do people enjoy surfing
What is the English Premier League?
Who is the 'sole Survivor' on the TV Show Survivor?
Why do companies play dividends?
Which major league baseball season is considered Sid Gordon's breakout year?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Eritrea or Gabon.
Keren, Franceville, Asmara, Port-Gentil, Assab, Libreville
What is Depreciation
Give me a list of the last five "Best New Artist" Grammy winners.
In a bingo game, which number is represented by the phrase “two little ducks”?
What is knitting?
Please summarize the timeline of the Chinese Exclusion Act.
What are some foods to cook to celebrate St. Patrick's Day?
Which is longest road or highway or motorway in the world
What is Jenkins?
What are common swimming strokes?
Give me a bullet list of some popular dashboard and visualisation tools
What do you think about the existence of alien lifeform?
Was the Pixie Lott song "Mama Do" ever the #1 single?
What language is HP GL
Classify each of the following animals as being domesticated or wild: dog, bear, dolphin, cat, cow, hippo, rhino
How do I optimize my Kafka consumption in Spark for low latency?
Tell me about the football career of Adao
How can I learn to snowboard?
Write a brief passage arguing for mandating Electric Vehicles (EVs) over gas combustion vehicles in the United States.
From the passage provided, extract the low end in Celsius of the optimal coffee extraction temperature range.
Tell me if these drinks are alcoholic or not: Coca-Cola, Mountain Dew, Budweiser, Rum, Vodka, Tomato Juice, Orange Juice, Sprite, Tequila, Margarita
Given this paragraph about WWII, how many fatalities happened?
How to play a forehead in tennis
Which of the companies in this list are social media platforms: Twitter, Amazon, Instagram, Square, Venmo, Tiktok, Apple.
what is the current location of Voyager 1 spacecraft in the cosmos?
Give me 5 ways to use a ripe avocado
List the ten episode titles from the sixth season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
What is the largest airline in the world ?
Name 5 popular musicians
From this summary, list three ways in which artificial intelligence systems show behavior misaligned human values, covered by Brian Christian in the three sections of his book "The Alignment Problem"?
How big is the universe?
Is it a good idea to have a protein shake after a gym workout? How do I make one?
To which countries have The Netherlands borders with.
What are some plastic use reduction ideas
What is guitar amp modeling?
Classify each of the following as "heavy" or "light": elephant, feather, hippo, paper, whale
Where should I live in Indiana?
Who was Cleopatra's first husband
What is the difference between a bass guitar and a normal guitar?`
How is data engineering different from data science?
Who was Paramahansa Yogananda?
Based on the text below, please summarise in a few lines
What was Freddie Mercury's real name?
Who were the major players in the Watergate conspiracy?
Which of Shakespeare’s plays is the longest?
What are some ways to care for a new tree
From the passage provided, extract the programming languages supported by Flink. Separate them with a comma.
Can you recommend 3 diverse National Parks in California worth a visit?
In 64th Annual Grammy Awards,  best album of the year award was given to
What are the top attractions to visit in Cancun?
Give me a list of the most recent Men's Indian Cricket Team captains in ODIs
What are the starting Pokemon in Pokemon Red and Blue?
Classify the eight planets of Earth's solar system as rocky or gaseous, according to their primary composition.
How reliable is public transportation?
What are some ways to inculcate practice based learning in kids?
Which is a species of fish? Nurse or Nurse shark
Who invented the radio?
Which city are Stroopwafels from?
What is System Thinking
What is the difference between a paint and a pinto?
Which is more important, Nature or Nurture?
What to do in Mexico City?
Give me a list of the best movies I've never seen.
Give me a list of the 3 best activities to do with your kids when the weather is bad outside
Provide a brief summary of the reaction to the creation of LIV Golf
Why do some people select private schools over public schools?
What is the nickname for West Ham United?
Who are the top 5 non-fiction writers of all time?
What is Angel Falls?
Given this paragraph about bicycle manufacturer Colnago, what Italian automobile company did Colnago work with to develop new carbon fiber technology?
Plan a weekend long vacation to Madrid, and mention multiple specific places you would visit and how you would travel in the city
Based on the text, please give me a brief summary of the history of the DTES neighbourhood in Vancouver
What are your favorite musical instruments?
When was Rhual constructed?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Purussaurus, Albacore Tuna
What is the difference between a chihuaha and a golden retriever?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Domra, Xaphoon
What is the best way to define a data&AI strategy?
Classify each of the following whether they help or hurt vision: glasses, binoculars, blindfold, sleep mask, telescope
Give me a comma separated list of all the organizations Henry Holst worked for based on this article.
Please list the main dog predators according to the passage
Given a reference text about the Spellenspektakel, tell me where it takes place and what games are played.
Jokic or Embiid for the MVP?
What are some of the sight seeing and outdoor activities to do in Portugal, Spain
Why is the most of the world's land is north of the equator?
How many awards did the film The Walrus and the Whistleblower win per this entry of information?
What are some areas that firefighters can safely stay in while fighting a wildfire?
List me some important facts about Tobiashammer from given text
Describe a morning routine from a 2 year olds perspective
How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?
Tell me whether these are literary characters or fruits: Gandalf, banana, Frodo Baggins, Aragorn, orange, apple, Sauron
What is the difference between common law and civil law?
Given this paragraph about Sam Baker, what is the Outland Trophy?
What makes the Expanse series better than other sci-fi?
How do you cook ribs?
Who is Rajinikanth?
Extract from the text year in which Italy First was launched
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Damaru, Laouto
Based on the reference text, what was the start date and the expected completion date of the reconstruction project on the Howard Frankland bridge.
What is the largest state by land size in the United States of America?
What colors are typically associated with Christmas?
Given this reference text about Jimmy John's, how many Jimmy John's locations are there?
Why do people like Red Light Therapy?
Classify the following by how they are affected by a strong permanent magnet as one of "attract", "repel", "nothing": iron nail, paper clips, a tin can, a compass, a plastic cup, a glass window, a leather wallet, a brick, a magnet of opposite polarity, pyrolytic carbon sheet.
What family do tigers, lions and panthers all belong to?
Why do people like to travel?
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Dongfeng, Chrysler
Why is Arsenal FC a great football club?
Give me the TLDR on using llamas to guard my livestock.
Tell me whether these are names of soft drinks or coffee: Starbucks, Peet's, Blue Bottle, Coca-Cola, Sprite, Canada Dry, Pepsi
Classify each of the following as an American coffee shop chain or an American fast-food hamburger restaurant: Starbucks, Dunkin Donuts, McDonald's, In-N-Out, Dutch Bros, Coffee Bean & Tea Leaf, Burger King, Carl's Jr
What is an unsecured loan?
How does running slow make you run faster?
Give me a bulleted list of all of the Star Wars movies in order by release date.
Given this paragraph about the M26, tell me how many times Hunt finished in the top 3, and explain your reasoning.
List all the persons in the text in alphabetical order using their surname: 

At acute times where there is a lot of pressure crossing the Channel, whether that’s on tunnel or ferries, then I think there’s always going to be a backup. I just urge everybody to be a bit patient while the ferry companies work their way through the backlog.”

Later, speaking on the Laura Kuenssberg programme on BBC One, Braverman denied the situation at Dover would repeat itself and blamed “bad weather”.

But her comments variously attracted ire and ridicule. The Liberal Democrats’ home affairs spokesperson, Alistair Carmichael, said: “These comments show Suella Braverman is in complete denial about the impact of the Conservative government’s botched deal with Europe on our borders. For Conservative ministers like Braverman, it is always someone else’s fault.

“Businesses and travellers are being tied up in reams of red tape but ministers are refusing to lift a finger. It shows the Conservative party is out of touch, out of excuses and should be out of power.”

The former Conservative cabinet minister David Gauke, who was stripped of the Tory whip for rebelling in a Brexit vote, tweeted: “If we were in the EU, the French would not need to do individual passport checks. If no individual passport checks, the process at Dover would be quicker. The Dover queues are, therefore, partly caused by Brexit. Not a contentious point, surely?”

Caroline Lucas, the Green party MP, described Braverman as being “on another planet as usual”. She said that the home secretary’s comments regarding no Brexit link contradicted those expressed by the port’s chief executive. In an interview with the Observer a year ago, Doug Bannister, admitted Brexit was causing longer processing times at the border.
Classify each of the following as either a quantitative major or qualitative major: English, mathematics, physics, statistics, history, law
Who is Richard Wayne Bogosian?
What is Python?
When was The White Mandigos band formed?
Extract what previous provinces Kardzhali a part of in the past
how to do a self-diagnose of burning out?
What causes mortgage interest rates to rise in the US?
Give me some movie/tv series to learn English
Who was Luis Gonzalez de Ubieta
What of the following component part of either Data Engineering or  Machine learning? Delta Live Table (DLT), MLFlow, Autoloader, AutoML
List 10 highest-grossing actors in the world.
what is Stoicism
What are really considered the Seven Wonders of the World?
What are the key benefits of Delta Live Tables?
What shape are Philodendron leaves?
Please extract Sinclair's awards from this paragraph and list them in bullets in order from oldest to most recent.
Tell me whether the following animals are part of the cat family: ocelot, lion, jackal, caracal, leopard, fox, tiger, lynx.
Why should you visit Ireland?
What is the name of the meme crypto coin that Elon Musk made famous?
When was the first bicycle race?
I want to buy a work monitor which is to be used along with the laptop. What features of monitor should be considered?
Give me a list of some of the most popular song from 70s Japanese Pop singer, Mariya Takeuchi
Tell me which one of the following countries are in the European Union: The Netherlands, Switzerland, Germany, Finland, the United Kingdom, Italy, Luxembourg, Turkey, Australia, Vietnam, Canada.
Solve the following equation: y = 7x + 2 where x = 2
Why do some people prefer to drink hot water than cold water?
Given this paragraph about Pittsford, New York, what year was the town settled?
Find all sports from this passage that use the term hat-trick.
From the text below extract the types of species and the percentage of its habitat in the form {Species}:{Percentage} and place them as a bullet list
Classify the following as types of birds or types of snakes: robin, cobra, rattlesnake, eagle, viper, raptor, bluejay, cottonmouth, copperhead, sparrow.
Write a paragraph about AI governance.
Who prepares the Global Hunger Index?
Who won the 149th Boat Race?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ilimba, Khim
Who is Stephen King?
Give me a list of the greatest chess players of all time
What is the team that Michael Jordan played?
Given a reference text about the E.S. Hoyt House, tell me how big the inside of the house is and how many rooms it has.
Tell me a story in a few sentences about food and how a few short words can make someone hungry
Which inventions of the 20th century had the greatest positive impact on human lifespan?
What is the name of the major school of praxiology not developed by Ludwig von Mises
Give me a bulleted list of all artists that performers on the Trolls World Tour Soundtrack.
How much is in a baker's dozen?
Which is the best work from Goethe?
Why there is no infant rice cereal in the market now?
What is an isotherm?
What is the fastest way to travel between the United States and Croatia?
Think up 5 different reasons to give my boss to take off work.
What is used to make the dough of boiled Chinese dumplings?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Polacanthus, Olive Ridley Turtle
What is the difference between natural and real numbers?
How many total seats are there?
What is feeding Springfield Reservoir?
How should I prioritize my time?
Who is Malcolm X?
What is counterintelligence?
How does water feel?
Tell me whether these cities are in Minnesota, Arizona or neither.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Jingle, Utogardon
What is Augusta National Golf Club?
Based on this paragraph about the Final Fantasy series, who created it?
Tell me whether these are part of the judicial, executive, or legislative branch of government: Supreme Court, President, House, Senate
Categorize the following countries based on the language their majority speaks: Iraq, Iran, Turkey, UAE, Qatar, Afghanistan, Syria
What country has hosted the Olympic Games the most often?
What do The Matrix, Point Break, Constantine, and John Wick have in common?
What is the Von Neumann architecture?
What is the difference between tennis and pickleball?
Extract all of the names of people in the below text separated by commas and ordered in alphabetical order by first name
What events did John James Monckton set the world record for?
From the Passage please find out what are the cause of climate change
Please provide a short biography of The Needle from the passage provided.
What is Ana María Gonzalez famous for
From the passage identify the most common colloquial terms for dismissal in the United States and United Kingdom. Display the results in comma separated format.
What is a good city to visit in Michigan in the summer?
Given this paragraph about Dartmouth College traditions, which homecoming-related traditions are illegal?
Please write a bulleted list of the key people involved in the construction of the Amsterdam Centraal station, and their role in the project.
Based on the passage provided in which years the movie named 'A star is Born' was released?
What causes ocean tides?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, when was the first model in OpenAI's GPT series trained?
Why is a higher interest rate on my home worse?
What is the most famous 'Running of the Bulls' event?
Based on this paragraph, what was the main focus of Mohammad Shah I's reign over his sultanate?
What are some examples of CPU architectures that do not use a dedicated flag register?
Share the best 7 European Cities for Nightlife
Where do bears live?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Giant Panda, Oviraptor
How does a zipper work?
In which part of Germany is the town Kirchenlamitz located?
what was population of India during Mauryan Era?
5 best Resume titles
Did Magic Johnson or Larry Bird win more collegiate and professional basketball championships?
How do you gain muscle?
What are some tricks to learning a new language?
What is Hornachuelos?
What is WordPress?
Classify each country as landlocked or not landlocked: China, Bolivia, Paraguay, Morocco, Ireland, Austria, Switzerland
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Lummi stick, Timple
Which onsen villages in Japan are the best to visit for foreign tourists? And what should I do once I'm in an onsen village?
What genre did the Chicks (formerly the Dixie Chicks) begin their career in?
Tell me if these vegetables are or are not green: carrot, courgette, bell pepper, radish, spaghetti squash, onion.
What is a Peloton in a bicycle race?
can i run for president?
Categorize these paint colours as “primary”, “secondary”, and “tertiary” according to the Quiller color wheel.

Cadmium Yellow Light, Permanent Green Light, Viridian Green, Green Blue, Phthalocyanine Blue, Ultramarine Blue, Ultramarine Violet, Magenta, Permanent Rose, Cadmium Red, Cadmium Scarlet, Cadmium Orange
Tell me whether each food is from a grain or animal: quinoa, millet, couscous, ribeye steak, pork belly, chicken wing
Can you tell if someone has hypothyroidism by looking at their face?
Will AI replace all human beings?
Give me a chronological bulleted list based on a timeline of events
Did Sir Winston Churchill win the Nobel Peace Prize?
Are the Golden State Warriors a good basketball team?
What are some fun ways that you could spend time with your family?
What is the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction?
According to the given paragraph, how do convolutional neural networks avoid overfitting in machine learning?
Give me an overview of the different types of SOC reports and what they are used for
Who played Harry Bosch in the eponymous TV series?
Would you typically find each of the following items in a bathroom, bedroom, kitchen or living room? Couch, pillow, dish soap, bedside table, oven, shower, toilet, coffee table, coffee machine
What is Mario Puzo's most famous book?
What is the capital city of Malaysia?
what is a computer?
Is it fun to play guitar? How do you start playing guitar?
Pitch me some bad ideas for cologne scents.
What are the names of some of the cities in the Boston Metro West area?
Extract all words derived from Swahili language in the following paragraph:
How many cents do I have if I have 3 quarters?
Give me a list of Greek foods that are absolutely amazing
Which Game of Thrones episode does Arya go blind?
What color is the Rainbow?
Name the Hindi novel that has become the 1st novel to win the International Booker Prize
If my car's fuel tank fits 18 gallon, how many times do I need to refuel on a 10-hour trip if the average speed is 60mph and the car's fuel efficiency is 30mpg?
Which of the following Countries are on the African Continent: Nigeria, Ethiopia, Egypt, Tanzania, Kenya, United Kingdom, Belgium, France, Germany, Russia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Brazil, Columbia.
What would be the pros and cons of replacing all civilian airplanes with dirigibles?
What is a bubble vest?
Where does Nick work on the show the New Girl
Who wrote the Great Gatsby?
According to this paragraph, tell me what is referred to as the most exciting collegiate sporting event.
Who were the children of Bill 101
Categorize each of the following as being beneficial or not beneficial to making a home protected from burglars: alarm system, open doors, locks, cameras, open windows
What is a bond in finance?
Why did Kim Kardashian and Ye divorce?
Why do people like biking?
What do you say to someone that is suicidal?
Which is a bird or fish: Black-necked grebe, Black tetra
Given this paragraph about the First Treaty that was signed after the Russo-Japanese War, was there a secret component?
Why is my baby crying right now?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Artega, Brammo, Vaydor
tell me whether these are synonyms or antonyms of love: dislike, care, like, hate, affection, harsh
What is the American show The Office based on?
Which films contain Tom Cruise and which do not contain Tom Cruise: "Trading Places", "Risky Business", "The Hunt for Red October", "Top Gun", "The Hangover", "Born on the 4th of July", "Saving Private Ryan", and "Reds"
Who is Alexander McGuire?
Which country has topped the swimming medals list in the summer olympics?
What are some fun ways to keep a toddler busy?
What are the disadvantages of Linux?
How do you plan a trip?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Jeep, Alpina
How can I better learn a new language?
From this passage, tell me what was the highest grossing movie in 2022 and what was the second highest grossing movie?
Given a reference text about the Cuban Missile Crisis, when did the crisis occur and how long did it last?
Write  the first paragraph of an advertising brochure describing an hotel nearby the Annecy Lake in France
Given this text of Mao Zedong, tell me how many people were killed in Mao's era through starvation, persecution, prison labour, and mass executions?
Who did John Evelyn support during the English Civil War?
Given this paragraph, extract a list of names that are playable by the user of this game.
Eminem's 8 Mile is named after a road in which city?
Is it safe for dogs to eat avacado?
How to reverse Type 2 diabetes naturally?
Who is the founder of the Communist Party?
What is gardening?
What are your thoughts of Michael Jackson as a singer and person
What is the largest pollutant?
Why do people drink coffee?
Give this paragraph about the Alley Cats a capella group, what famous talk show hosts have they performed for?
Provide a bulleted list of ways to spend less money
How should I deal with my kid's allergy?
What does Wittgenstein view as a problem with learning a language using "ostensive defining"?
Identify the bird from the list: Queensbury, Kingfisher, Bishopsgate
What are fun things to do in New York City
What is an string instrument that is similar to a Violin, but larger in size and with a lower and deeper sound?
Classify each of the following as either typical indoor or outdoor sports: Chess, Carrom, Cricket, Billiards, Table Tennis, Field Hockey, Rugby, Snooker, Soccer and Boxing
What conference does the Spokane Braves belong to?
What are some sports that are played with a round ball?
Given a reference text about coleus rotundifolius, what are they commonly known as?
Give me a summary of 1812 war
Best TV shows I've ever seen.
Who is the Denver Broncos best player in franchise history?
Classify each of the following as a city or country: Bangkok, India, London, Mexico.
Write a short story about a little girl who befriends a dragon, the dragons magical powers can bring her to a different universe.
What are some good body weight exercises for core and abs?
What is Assassin's Creed?
Which positions did Kamerion Wimbley play in High school?
Tell me whether these are names of movie directors or authors: Quentin Tarantino, Martin Scorsese, Christopher Nolan, Ernest Hemingway, Stephen King, J.K. Rowling
Why do people like the game Diplomacy?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Spinosaurus, Common Bottlenose Dolphin
How often is The Australian Chess Championship held?
What are some types of physical exercise?
What is Kraft Dinner?
What is William Shakespeare's greatest play?
Why are people scared of snakes?
List some of the great houses that appear in the series "A Song of Ice and Fire."
Please write some key points on Booker prize from the given passage.
Categorize the following list into common greetings and common parting words: goodbye, hi, hiya, howdy, see ya, what's up, i'm out, how are you, how are you doing, peace, sup, talk to you later, see you soon, have a good one
Given this reference paragraph about the history of the 'five whys' technique, what was the original intention of asking the 'five whys'?
classify the following spending items as either grocery, entertainment, food & drink, travel, bills: caltrain, train, nijiya market, dinner, internet bill, plane, boba, bar
What are some languages that feature hygienic macros?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ikembe, Cimbalom
What are the primary uses of horses according to the text?
What was the former name of The Washington Commanders football team?
Why do people chose to homeschool their children?
What is the gun culture in the United States?
From the passage provided, extract the awards received by Jensen Huang from 1999-2021.
Classify each of the following as either a single digit or a double digit number: 8, 4, 1, 12, 87, 65, 3, 5, 45, 97, 6, 2, 34, 71, 9, 48, 0, 7, 31, 50.
Extract the basic universal competition sections of the triathlon in order, and explain each section.
Given a reference text about Larissa Ilinichna Volpert, tell me what game she played, when she was champion, and what titles she earned.
How are the teams which qualify for the National Football League Playoffs determined?
Tell me about the new premier of New South Wales
What are the words of House Tyrell?
Which US city is known to be the bachelorette party center of the country, besides Las Vegas?
How many letters there are in the China language?
Which of these forms of Bay Area transit are AC Transit bus lines and which are trains: Caltrain, BART, 51B, 36, 51A, 79, VTA Light Rail.
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Captain America, Stargirl, Superman
Who is Santa Clause?
classify each of the following as a US state or US state capital: Atlanta, Washington, Boston, Iowa, Sacramento, Alaska
List the vegetation found in Antarctica in a common separated manner.
How many U.S. presidents were born in Virginia.
Why do humans like golf?
What is Adderall?
How long after the release of the album “Abbey Road” did The Beatles break up?
Given a reference text about Richard Brandon Morris, tell me what when and where he was born as well as the different colleges and universities he attended.
What is a Ferocactus
What is Holi?
Which is a species of fish? Toadfish or Toad
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Alpine, Cadillac
What is the political philosophy of isolationists?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Namibia or Lithuania.
Klaipėda, Oshakati, Kaunas, Windhoek, Vilnius, Rundu
In what year did Apple debut the 'Mac Operating System'?
write short essay on Neil Armstrong experience on moon
Where does Kieran Liam McAnespie come from?
what happens when you blow air into alkaline water?
What is the name of the country that still has an emperor?
Give me a list of five surf spots in Southern California
Name the Khals known to currently be alive in A Song of Ice and Fire.
What are different ways to make eggs?
Can you tell me something interesting about Bald Head Island?
Are iodized salt and kosher salt the same?
I need to write a deck summarising the benefits of delta in the lakehouse, can you give me some good slide suggestions?
When was the Bitcoin whitepaper published?
Which are the top 3 states of India that account for receiving the maximum number of interstate emigrants?
Why Cancun is famous
Who are the best guitarists of all time?
What is the Swiney Prize?
what is one good example on a hackathon project for a middle school student for programming?
what is Sociology?
Why were the Beatles so popular?
Given the context below, please answer the provided question: 

Context: 
In fact, the first highlight moment of the Chat Assistant occurred twelve years ago at the launch event of the fifth-generation iPhone. Scott Forstall, then Apple's software chief, pressed a button on the iPhone to summon Siri and asked it questions. Inquiring about the weather, searching for restaurants, checking stock prices. Keep in mind that this was a time when smartphones were far from widespread, and being able to check stock prices on a mobile phone was already a very novel thing.

Question: 
Who was the software chief during the first release of Apple Siri?
Given this paragraph about the dimensions of a volleyball court, is there a difference between the hight of the net for men's competitions vs women's competitions?
What is the attraction in the United States for the Jeep Wrangler?
Describe the sensation of taking a cold shower and explain the rationale for why someone might take one.
Imagine you are getting married and are attending a wedding cake tasting. Describe five different flavors you try, with combinations of both cake and frosting for each tasting. Pick one best flavor at the end of the five tastings.
I dont think I should pursue higher education. From the following, what are some pros and cons of getting a masters education?

degree to show mastery of a subject
Takes money
Hard work is required
Losing out on entrepreneurial opportunities by the time spent studying
degree to show mastery of a subject
skill development
Time away from family
Set you up for lifelong success
respect in society
Write an essay describing why baseball should be considered America's pastime.
Fix the typos and grammar below
Who are some of the main characters in the show "South Park"?
Given this reference text about a video game, when was Donkey Kong released?
What are your 5 favourite museums in London?
Who regulates banks in Australia?
Who was Nike in Greek Mythology?
Order the following list descending 8, 5,2,4,8,9
What are people from Wisconsin also referred to as?
Write a response to a veteran interested in renting my house
What are the main considerations for chick care when raising backyard chickens?
What happened to Captain Bligh after the Mutiny on the Bounty?
Name a style of hot yoga.
What is data visualisation in the context of business intelligence?
List the years in which Anne Rochelle Steely Ramirez participated in Sprint events based on the passage. Use bulleted format to represent the years and sort in ascending order.
What are the defense mechanisms?
What is the format of an email?
What is the Shiba Inu (crypto)?
Why is it important to vote?
List five items you would need to survive in the wilderness.
What is a viral video?
Provide a table of the various recruiting lists that Calvin Johnson was named to and who named him to the list and do it in CSV format
What products and services are offered by Falco electronics?
How popular is K-pop around the world?
How do you explain cloud computing to a 5 year old?
Can you tell me about the history of sports in Philadelphia?
Given a reference text about David Moses ben Meir Dyte, tell me what he is known for.
What are the primary breathing apparatuses for scuba
What are two languages spoken in Spain other than Castilian Spanish?
Why do humans like dogs?
What are some popular movies from the 1980s?
What is the difference between American Football and European Football?
What are some questions I can ask my mom to get to know her better?
Why do some people like horror films?
I would like to get a camper for the family vacations.  What things do I need to be aware of when buying one?
What is Bart Simpson's best friend named?
What is the difference between open-toed and close-toed shoes?
What were gulags and who lived in them?
How do I keep my plants alive?
Why Interlaken is famous
What are 6 different types of pizza toppings?
When you are going kayaking in california in the summer, which of these clothes would be appropriate to wear: a lifejacket, a swimsuit, a wetsuit, sweatpants, a knit hat, a ball-cap
Extract the teams that Bob Sanders played throughout his career, and put them in a comma-separated list.
Given a reference text about the 2022 Mazar-i-Sharif mosque bombing, how many people were injured and killed?
Give me a bulleted list of the Seven Wonders of Portugal and their construction dates:
Name some male celebrities who have been diagnosed with breast cancer.
What are the seven wonders of the world?
What’s a recipe for chimichurri?
Given this paragraph about blockchain, how did blockchain influence bitcoin cryptocurrency?
What was the first name of Thomas Attewell's brother and cousin?
Classify the following Stephen King works as either a 'book', a 'movie' or 'both': Shawshank Redemption, Carrie, Under the Dome, Sleeping Beauties, The Shining, Sleepwalkers, Dreamcatcher, Bag of Bones, Creepshow, Insomnia, The Green Mile, Cat's Eye
What are the steps to perform breathing meditation?
What are the toxic house plants for cats?
Given a reference text about the Mauritius fody, tell me what they look like.
Given this article about Operation Aurora, which companies were targeted in the attacks?
From the text given, extract the iPhone Models and the announcement dates and list them using the bullets in the format {iPhone Models} - {Announcement Date}
Please share some important points to remember for Oscar awards from the given text
What is a phenotype?
What is a less known rule or move in Chess?
What team represents Concordia University in Irvine, California?
How many syllables are in the word smarter?
Why Paris is know as the city of light ?
What are the main ingredients for making bread?
Provide a list of diseases which spread in the Diamond Princess and the virus that caused them. Use bulleted list in the format ‘Disease Name - Virus Name - year’.
Give me a list of ways to lose weight
What happens if don't drink water
When did Iranians convert to Islam?
How to give a good presentation?
Based on this article, considerations of what time zone is used for determining what land is in the dead man zone?
How are the characters Balrog, Vega and M. Bison connected in Street Fighter II?
Is karaoke fun?
Who was the first coach of the Seattle SuperSonics?
Name one science fiction book from China
Why is the forum in Rome named the forum?
Which football team should I support?
Give me some suggestions to stop my kids from whining.
How does a Husqvarna automatic lawn mower operate.
What name is Beijing also known by?
How old is Tamil language?
What causes a spinning top to stop?
Is it safe to look at the sun directly?
What is rheological weldability?
Tell me which animals are bigger than the average human: Dog, Mouse, Elephant, Rhino, Hippo, Cat, Squirrel.
How to lose weight?
What does airplane glide ratio mean?
Let me know if you think these are musical instruments or tools: Piano, chisel, Marimba, hammer, drill, scissor, violin, drums, screwdriver, brass, clarinet.
Who is the top baseball player based on offensive categories that are not in the major league baseball hall of fame with no chance of getting in while alive.
How difficult is it to learn how to juggle?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Archelon Turtle, Bornean Orangutan
Give me a bulleted list of different ways to make a lot of money.
What is a Fixed asset in finance?
Extract the non-meat ingredients of the sandwich in the passage provided. Separate them with a pipe symbol.
What are some important things to bring on a bicycle ride.
Think of lots of different sources of light to read a book
Give me a list of fantastic movies
What are popular street foods from Maharashtra in India
What is the world's oldest annual marathon based on the reference text below?
From the passage provided, extract the year Pro Kabaddi League was established.
Given a reference text about Georg Friedrich Parrot, tell me when and where he was born as well as what he studied.
Who is the best golfer to ever play the game?
Classify the numbers based on their divisibility by 5 or 3
15, 55, 33, 50, 99
Which of the following animals are primates: Human, Dog, Bonobos, Cat, Bats, Goat, Bears, Orangutans, Wolf, Lion, Squirrel, Koala, Cheetah, Deer, Orca, Gorillas, Camel, Hamsters, Lemurs, Blue whale, Chimpanzee
Given this paragraph about cycling, who holds the record for the most Tour de France stage victories?
How many years passed from Ghana's decline to the Mali Empire consolidating western Sudan?
What are some good yoga poses for beginners?
What is Cryptocurrency?
Write a brief about your recent vacation
Write a haiku about sitting on the shore and watching the waves.
From the passage provided, extract the names and published work of the early economists. Identify the name and then the published work separated with a dash. Separate the name and published works pairs with a semi-colon.
Classify each of the following as either a country or a city: Sweden, France, Paris, Bali, Rotterdam, Seville, India, San Fransisco, Amritsar, Portugal
What is the fastest train in the world?
What is the Baur au Lac
What causes a recession?
When are storms most common in the North Indian basin?
What is the best location for a family vacation in western Europe?
What was MarCal's restaurant?
Provide a list of ways musicians can earn income from their music craft.
What is the national day of Germany?
What is rowing?
Given this paragraph about Africa, why Africa's per capita  GDP is low?
Given the numerous awards in Major League Baseball, what is the Willie Mays World Series Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award?
What are the advatages and disadvatages of commuting with bikes comparing to cars?
Given a reference text about Anoop Nautiyal, what did his work focus on?
What is a typical Humpback Whale migration pattern
Provide a list of body parts that are only three letters long. Here are some body parts that are three lettered words: toe, rib, eye, ear, leg and jaw.
Who is the main cast in Seinfeld TV show?
The paper "Attention is all you need" proposed the Transformer model for the first time, which had a profound impact on the subsequent LLM. Please give the main core idea of Transformer described in this paper
Classify these vegetables based on their color.
mushroom, spinach, cauliflower, broccoli
How will chatGPT and other large language models effect education and engineering disciplines?
What is the standard Gibbs free energy
what is Financial centre
How many times was Edinburgh Castle besieged in its long history?
What is the loudest animal on Earth?
Give me a list of popular news podcast to listen to
How should you care for grapes?
Have you heard of Doleshwor Mahadeva temple?
Please classify from which sci-fi universe are following movies, or tv series: The return of the Jedi, Deep Space 9, Avengers
Describe a recurring dream you've had.
Is learning piano on a keyboard just as effective as learning on a grand/upright piano?
Stan laurel, Mickey Rooney, Lana Turner what in common
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Why do children of Indian Origin do well in SpellBee contests in the USA?
Give me a few ways that I can get stronger and in better shape before the next ski season.
Tell me whether these are TV shows or movies
2021 Nobel Prize was awarded to which all Journalists
What is the difference between a pomelo and a grapefruit?
What are the benefits of exercising and why one should workout everyday especially if you have a sedentary lifestyle that makes you sit all day long?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Maddale, Banhu
From this paragraph, tell me when Mary died and when did Elizabeth had Mary, Queen of Scots imprisoned. Also, who supported plots to have Elizabeth overthrown?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Ultron, Brainiac
With given text as a reference, Please jot down some details about Central Michigan University
Extract the ingredients in bee pollen from the text.
Name five NFL teams in the AFC.
What is the difference between income and property taxes?
What are some of the facts about the festival of San Fermín that could explain it to someone that doesn't know about it based on this text.
Who was the Greek goddess of love
Who is the primary male protagonist on the TV show "The X-Files"?
What is the capital of Germany?
What are the four seasons of the year?
what are the 5 skandhas?
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most recently elected presidents from Argentina.
What are the words of House Allyrion?
What is buoyant force?
Which of these items are helpful for starting a fire? Matches, kindling, banana, newspaper, water, plastic bath toy, a zippo, wet grass, thin dry stick, and liquid charcoal lighter.
Tell me about David Wolfenberger
Classify each of the following as either a typical cat name or dog name: Spot, Whiskers, Mittens, Buddy, Fido, Rover, Lassie, Rex, Felix, Socks, Tiger
What are the benefits of meditation?
Who created Sesame Street?
Can AI take my job
Give me a bulleted list of the last seven World Series winners
Which team has drafted Nkem-Nkechukwu Ojougboh?
Who started Belu?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Conga, Ninera
Who is the prime minister of India?
Which of these foods are kosher? Lobster, cheeseburger, hamburger and fries, shrimp and grits, thai red curry with tofu, thai red curry with chicken, birthday cake, lentil soup with ham hock.
What is the month of Ramadan?
What caused the Global Financial Crises?
Given the following paragraph about New York City, how many people live in the city?
I'm planning a trip to India. How do I decide which places to visit?
Where can you observe the stars?
What factors should I considering when selecting a tennis racquet?
Classify these colors into primary or not primary: red, blue, green, orange, yellow, white, blue, pink, black, white, brown.
What are the fifty United States in alphabetical order, as of 2023?
What is a bond
What are the most easy to keep plants?
What is nomadism?
What elements make a soap opera and what are examples?
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
We are expecting a baby. Can you describe your experience and provide some pointers as a first time parent?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Megalania, Sea Turtle
I would like to learn about data and ai. What would you recommend?
Who is the best golfer in the world?
Who were the Beatles?
When was the last time the Cubs won the World Series
Total 15 PMs served under Queen Elizabeth II, name the last PM
Can you show me a list of all the major league baseball teams in the MLB for 2023?
How do you find a college internship in your interested field of study?
Name some TV shows that American actress Gillian Anderson has been in.
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Lex Luthor, Doctor Doom
How many planets orbit the sun?
What is a top spin serve in tennis?
Given this paragraph about the sport of triathlon, what are the individual sports make up a triathlon
What are the examples of eponyms provided in the passage. List them in the bulleted format.
If the year is 2013, is the Samsung E1200 being produced?
When should I take a medication?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Talking drum, Tambura
What are the pros and cons of high interest rates?
Who is Jorge Luis Borges?
Where was the 2018 UCI Track Cycling World Championships held?
Which of the following films came out after 1948?
Why should people convert lawns and ornamental gardens to native plants?
From the given text, Please summarize the early life of Élodie Yung
Classify the following hockey teams as either National Hockey League (NHL) or American Hockey League (AHL): Abbotsford Canucks, Bakersfield Condors, Belleville Senators, Bridgeport Islanders, Calgary Wranglers, Charlotte Checkers, Chicago Wolves, Cleveland Monsters, Coachella Valley Firebirds, Colorado Eagles, Grand Rapids Griffins, Hartford Wolf Pack, Henderson Silver Knights, Hershey Bears, Iowa Wild, Laval Rocket, Lehigh Valley Phantoms, Manitoba Moose, Milwaukee Admirals, Ontario Reign, Providence Bruins, Rochester Americans, Rockford IceHogs, San Diego Gulls, San Jose Barracuda, Springfield Thunderbirds, Syracuse Crunch, Texas Stars, Toronto Marlies, Tucson Roadrunners, Utica Comets, Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins, Anaheim Ducks, Arizona Coyotes, Boston Bruins, Buffalo Sabres, Calgary Flames, Carolina Hurricanes, Chicago Blackhawks, Colorado Avalanche, Columbus Blue Jackets, Dallas Stars, Detroit Red Wings, Edmonton Oilers, Florida Panthers, Los Angeles Kings, Minnesota Wild, Montreal Canadiens, Nashville Predators, New Jersey Devils, New York Islanders, New York Rangers, Ottawa Senators, Philadelphia Flyers, Pittsburgh Penguins, San Jose Sharks, Seattle Kraken, St Louis Blues, Tampa Bay Lightning, Toronto Maple Leafs, Vancouver Canucks, Vegas Golden Knights, Washington Capitals, Winnipeg Jets
Give me list of top 10 countries by GDP
What are some ways in which I can use a pen for other than writing?
What are some of the benefits of learning flute as a child
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
What are brambles?
Tell me whether these states are in Eastern Time, Central Time, or neither
Who is RFK?
8 Simple Ways to Adopt a Healthy and sustainable Eating Pattern
What is brackish water and where does it occur?
Given a reference text about Ingwelala, tell me which game farms are on the reserve.
Do archaeologists dig up dinosaurs?
How many triangles can be formed with 6 matchsticks of equal size without breaking or overlapping them?
Why is the sky blue?
How do government control inflation?
Name every month that has 30 days
Identify the bird from the list: Black mamba, Black grouse, Black magic
What area in Washington is best known for its wine production?
What's the differences of the Wing Chun kongfu and the traditional Shaolin Kongfu?
Tell me some point by point details about Art Deco using given text as a reference
From the passage mention the different verticals in which SoftBank Group Corp. invests in. Display the results in comma separated format.
Name five cities in the state of Texas.
Why is the immigration system broken?
Which of the following are considered golf clubs: woods, irons, jellies, sliders, hybrids, wedges, driver, squeaker, putters
What is ASEAN?
Which episode did Daenerys Targaryen lose her dragon, Viserion, to a White Walker's spear?
Classify these countries into these continents (Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Europe, Australia/Oceania): Morocco, Vietnam, New Zealand, Chad, Afghanistan, Jordan, Lebanon, Monaco, Malta, Dominica, Paraguay
Please give me a list of qualities that make the Masters is golf's top tournament unique?
What caused the 2007-2008 financial crisis?
What was the first modern trading card game created?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Why is it called the Hawaiian pizza?
Who is William Crump?
What are foundational models?
How many keys are in a standard piano?
What are the Regulations of Football?
When was the Hundred Years War and who fought in it?
Who is Tom Billeter
Which of the following items are types of books: novels, biographies, historical fiction, reference texts, graphic novels, newspapers, magazines, flyers, pamphlets, pocket dictionaries.
What are some defining qualities of authoritarianism?
What is Ayurveda?
What is skydiving?
What do I need to learn how to knit?
Write a letter to my boss that convinces them that I deserve a raise.
What is the best kind of shade tree for a backyard in growing region 6?
What's the best country in the world?
In my upcoming trip across Europe I'm planning to visit the following countries: Germany, Austria, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Greece. Are all of them part of the Schengen area?
What is the oldest known civilization?
Classify each of the following as either titles by George R.R. Martin or Robert Jordan: A Game of Thrones, Dying of the Light, The Armageddon Rag, A Storm of Swords, A Song for Lya, The Great Hunt, Towers of Midnight, Lord of Chaos, A Crown of Swords, Crossroads of Twilight
What was the first commercial relational database product launched in the market?
Given this article on Donkey Kong Country 2, who is the villain of the plot and where does the story take place?
Who is Linda Hargreaves
Make a list, using dot points, of the last five cities who hosted the Olympics.
Home many storage options does Azure Synapse provide?
What qualifies an animal as a monotreme?
Why is November 14 celebrated as world diabetes day?
Which is a species of fish? Mullet or Afro
What is the difference between the Debt Snowball and Debt Avalanche methods of paying off debt?
Classify these wines in Red or White:  Chardonnay ,Cabernet Sauvignon,Moscato, Merlot, Syrah, Malbec, Pinot Noir, Riesling, Sangiovese, Sauvignon Blanc
What would be a first date option in Boston?
Who owns the largest share of the Vancouver Whitecaps FC?
What is the JDK?
Give me the history and background of the Phoenix Suns basketball franchise
Classify the following as either red wines or white wines: Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot Blanc, Riesling, Chardonnay, Pinot Grigio, Sauvignon Blanc, Merlot, Syrah, Shiraz
What is The Dark Side of the Moon?
Give me a list of the top ten movies, according to IMDb ratings.
Whats the name of the person who wrote  the US declaration of independence?
What are different tools and channels used in organizations for communication and training?
Extract universities Moret studied at and his year of graduation for each, and put them in a bulleted list.
How do I find my Tesla charging station?
Tell me whether matches in each sport is usually played individually or on a team: baseball, golf, tennis, wrestling, hockey
How can a balance be drawn between capitalism and economic equality?
Classify if the following are hollywood or bollywood movies: Zanjeer; The Shawshank redemption; Sholay; Pride & prejudice
How many albums has Taylor Swift released?
Tell me whether these are a solid, liquid, or gas
Have any Defensive players won the Heisman Trophy?
Given a reference text about Pultenaea empetrifolia, tell me the colors of its flowers.
What is the dominant character encoding for the World Wide Web?
Give me a list of best Studio Ghibli Films
Extract from the text what are the Proteins functions in the organism, and separate them with a comma,
Who won the 2022 Masters golf tournament?
What is the appeal to baby led weaning?
Give me a list of different ways to brew coffee
What sport is Ruud Gullit known for
Name some books that Jane Austen is best known for.
Extract the most recent upper bound and low bound of the sofa constant and return them in the format {Bound Type} - {Bound Value}.
Summarize the key developments in human evolution based on the paragraph below
Write a brief paragraph about the evolution of Egyptian pyramids.
What is net worth?
Classify each country as Spanish or Portuguese speaking: Peru, Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Mexico, Portugal
What are the general rules of the Baseball?
What are the primary causes of inflation?
Please classify each of the following as European or Asian countries: England, Thailand, Greece, Japan.
Write an email to someone updating that I’ve accepted the position at their company to which they referred me
Malibamat'so River
Tell me which of the following activities are types of workouts: walking, running, weightlifting, HIIT, cardio, yoga, sleeping, sitting at your chair, standing, looking into the distance, watching TV.
Please tell me the main global sources of energy production
If you could not fill a pool with water, what would you fill it with?
What is deep dish pizza?
Given this paragraph about Wabuska, Nevada, when was a post office first opened in the town?
What is cholesterol and bad cholesterol and why would I want to reduce my levels?
Without quoting directly from the text, tell me about rainbows.
Which is the mighty river that begins at Lake Itasca in Northern Minnesota
Which of these countries are in South America: Mexico, Peru, Brazil, Chile, Ghana, India.
What is Football?
What are the typical items used to create a Haft-sin?
What is the top floor of the King's Building based on this article? What floor is found below that?
Classify these US cities into states that they are in.
Jersey City, Buffalo, Schenectady, Newark, Yonkers, Hoboken
What is the weather like in San Francisco?
What is an open platform?
What are the primary colors?
Best car Brand in the world in Popularity?
Which countries are part of the five eyes alliance and what is its purpose?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Thavil, Seni rebab
What are the advantages and disadvantages of allowing people to perform delivery tasks by walking instead of requiring the use of a bike or car? When do you think it is more pragmatic for deliveries to be fulfilled by walking versus biking or driving?
Classify each of the following as a penalty or scoring play in football: touchdown, holding, offsides, safety, field goal, false start
Imagine you have to spend a week on a deserted island. What are 5 items you'd bring with you and why?
Extract the most recent owner from the following Wikipedia paragraph.
What are the new 7 Wonders of the World:
What is the stock market?
Can you provide a summary of who Harvey Marion LaFollette was?
Which episode does Jon Snow lead a battle where he is outnumbered by Ramsey Bolton?
Tell me whether these sports are played on grass or ice: figure skating, hockey, football, soccer, curling
Using this text, please give me a short bulleted list of famous figures buried at the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York
What was the Byzantine Empire?
What is the difference between a goose and a geese?
Given this reference text about the Hawaiian scale, how tall is a wave that is six foot Hawaiian?
One of the best place to visit in Mexico
For the Zodiac sign Gemini, Share some important details from given text.
which country that has the most pyramids in the world?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Namor, Aquaman
Classify each of the following as a state or a city: Florida, Texas, Alaska, Houston, Charlotte, Charleston, Savannah, Kansas, San Diego
India’s overall food grain production (based on 4th Advance estimates) is estimated to have touched how much?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Which is the most sparsely populates nation?
What is a homonym?
Tell me about Crater Lake National Park
Which was the first satellite launched by China?
Which of the following are prime numbers: 7, 12, 23, 33, 64, 79, 97, and 100.
Why do people like golf?
What are the different type of coats of dogs?
Give me a bulleted list of 5 hobbies I should try.
Who was the US president during the 9/11 attacks?
classify these as kitchen or bathroom items: toothpaste, pan, pots, spoons, shampoo, dish soap, bath soap, bath bombs, plates, oven mitts, cups, toilet paper
What is the Barkley Marathons?
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
From the passage identify the shape of bottom of chemistry test tube. Display the results in comma separated format.
Where was the 2017 European Judo Championships held
Given this paragraph about a Tesla Model 3, tell me what the EPA-rated ranges are for the various models.
Extract the factors that influence the cost of building a house
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Sarcosuchus, Plains Bison
What are the titles of the songs on Side B for this album?
What are lots of different smells you might experience when going into a candle store?
Tell me which of the following are real car parts: differential, gearbox, splinehook, flidget, wheel.
What is it like to live in a black hole?
Are cats or dogs better?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bedug, Moraharpa
What is the difference between archaeology and paleontology?
Do you think depression ran in Wittgenstein's family?
From the passage note down the valuation of NFT trade for the year 2020 and 2021. List the results in format ‘Year: Value‘.
Which player scored the Premier League winning goal for Manchester City vs. QPR in 2012?
Why does Nadal play tennis left-handed?
How is beer made?
Holidays such as Christmas, Easter and Halloween are associated with themes. Sort the following items into the holiday with which they are most frequently associated: elves, chocolate, presents, pumpkin, rabbit, candy, pilgrim, egg, Santa, Jesus, hot-crossed buns, and reindeer
Why is sailing so much fun?
Hello, my family and I recently went to the zoo and saw a number of animals.  Please identify the animals in this summary and organize them in order of size.  My son's favorite animal is an elephant, and he saw an elephant in the grassland.  My wife caught a parakeet trying to eat our popcorn.  My daughter was scared by lion that she saw on the prairie.  I missed all of these animals and only saw a boa constrictor in an a cage.
Seven Wonders of the Underwater World
Please give me a short bulleted list of the major achievements Taylor Swift has achieved.
What is functional genomics?
Who is Robert Kiyosaki?
Why 2 is greater than 3?
What is a grocery store?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Maraca, Valiha
What was Tyson Fury's fight record as an amateur?
Extract the list of players mentioned in the text. Separate them with a comma.
What makes the platypus such an interesting animal?
What is Central Park?
What is a trumpet?
What is a rocking chair?
How can I decide what bike I should get?
What is an adjacency list?
What is accessibility?
What are the main football teams in the city of Madrid?
Tell me which of the following guitars are hollow bodies or not: Gibson ES-175, Gibson ES-335, Gibson SG, Gibson Les Paul, Fender Stratocaster, Fender Telecaster.
In which country is Jean Marie Ralph Féthière a politician?
What kind of dog should I get?
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of a child's imagination?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Xenoposeidon, Sloth
What is the best bidding system in duplicate bridge?
What are three ways to build a pillow fort?
Who are the Wagner group
Choose the word which is different from the rest: Barley, Rice, Wheat, Mustard, Bajra.
Is Castle Island really an Island?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Arabian camel, European fallow
List some TV shows that Canadian actor William B. Davis has been in.
Who wrote Beloved?
Who let the dogs out?
Give me a list of five films made in the 1950s whose stars are still alive
What is the smallest state in the United States?
Is it acceptable to sign a cappella (without musical accompaniment) at a community musical theater audition?
Classify each of the following dishes as either 'Indian', 'Italian', 'Latin American', 'African' or 'Neither' based on their cuisine. Biriyani, Pasta, Dosa, Risotto, Burger, Lasagne, Tajine,  Empanadas, Tacos
What to do when you are bored?
What factors are identified as contributing to growth and development in early childhood?
What is the meaning of life?
What are the titles to the six volumes of Sir Winston Churchill's "The Second World War"?
Based on this paragraph, please summarize Cormac McCarthy's use of punctuation.
How does the German voting system work?
Who was given Stockholm Water Prize 2022 ?
If my car is broken while I am riding on the Highway, what should I do?
Write a friendly email to my neighbor asking them to keep the noise down after 10pm on Weekdays.
What is the best way to put a toddler to sleep at night?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Tarly?
What was unique about Scrubs?
How many octaves does a harpsichord have?
Who were the Pilgrims and what holiday is typically associated with them?
Who was charged in August 1902, under the Offences against the Person Act 1861 with incitement to murder?
Please list all the emperors in the following passage
From the paragraph provided, extract the mechanisms of heat transfer.
What does your vacation rental have to offer?
Is GitHub Actions are free?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Slovakia or Croatia.
Košice, Bratislava, Zagreb, Split, Petržalka, Rijeka
Which is a species of fish? Rohu or Naked Mole
What is the purpose of using Terraform modules ?
Write an email to a landlord asking to replace a kitchen sink
What are some examples of movies that won best picture in the 1990s?
When is the best time to visit Chicago?
Why do people watch the English Premier League more than any other soccer league in the world?
Write a review of Neil Gaiman's book American Gods.
What does SRO mean for concert tickets?
Summarize the main components of a Kubernetes cluster control plane from this paragraph
Should I buy a Shinkansen Rail Pass if I visit Japan?
When and where was Lyubomir Nikolov Vladikin born?
List the items you need to play pickleball
Tell me whether these are books by black authors: I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Homegoing, Between the World and Me, Becoming, Beloved, The Color Purple.
Think up different ways to make a baby stop crying.
Which U.S president had a home called The Hermitage?
What are the ingredients in panch phuran?
In Digital Marketing, what is the difference between SEO and SEM?
What is the difference between the Masters and the U.S. Open in golf?
How are Social Security and Medicare in the USA funded?
Give me a list of ten vegetables that are green.
What is the name of the gruff and tough female Viper pilot on the 2003 reboot of "Battlestar Galactica"?
What's the best way to potty train a puppy?
Where does the word plumbing originate from?
What is a Romance language?
what type of economy is China?
Why is aluminum wiring in a home dangerous?
I need to plan a wedding and I have no idea where to start. Will you help me brainstorm a few things I should do?
I have 3 apples, Jack has 4 pears and Jill has 5 books. After I ate two of Jack's pears, how many fruits we have in total now?
Who founded the city of Price, Quebec?
Based on the reference text, why was the eastern section of the bridge rebuilt?
What are all the different types of alpaca breeds?
Provide a short review for a Japanese restaurant called Honto in Brisbane. It was a little hard to find as it is in a backstreet, but we found it without too much trouble. Be sure to mention it was very atmospheric and that the food was great.
From this summary of how Bilbo found the Ring in The Hobbit, how did Bilbo beat Gollum at the Riddle game?
Extract the platforms that the game can be played on and separate them with a comma.
When was the first Academy Awards?
What are the top largest economies in the world?
Which is a species of fish? Tarp or Carp
Extract the names of all of the albums that Taylor Swift has released. Separate them with a comma.
Did Ghana lose by 100 against India in a soccer game?
From the given text, list me details about parity plot
How do you brew beer?
What are some of the most popular undergraduate majors at UC Berkeley?
Which of these are Satellite and Planets: Hydra, Venus, Titan, Kerberos, Pluto, Jupiter, Moon
Classify these Indian cities into states that they are in.
Hyderabad, Kolkata, Purulia, Medak, Warangal, Darjeeling
Who were the Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers in the Harry Potter series?
What gear do you need to go on a backpacking trip?
Who are the top Presidents of USA
What are the characteristics of chihuahuas?
What should I wear in the summer?
Who are some famous Greek philosophers?
List the two oldest University of California campuses separated by a semicolon.
Why do people have children?
What is the difference between American Football and Futbol?
From a financial perspective, tell me five things should be considered when retiring.
What are the words of House Bolton?
Where is Meerut?
What are the most dangerous hobbies?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Aurochs, Hawksbill Turtle
what bicycle should I buy?
Best Actor award in 27th Screen Actors Guild(SAG) Awards was given posthumously to whom?
How far is the village from Warsaw?
List of all the factions that Lincoln had to deal with, and if they were his allies or enemies.
What are ten woodworking projects that I could complete in a weekend?
Given this reference paragraph, who coined the term dead man zone?
What are some of the subjects that a school student might study.
What are the 5 biggest cities in France in terms of inhabitants?
Which of the following are types of real estate assets: single family homes, multi-family homes, apartments, condos, townhomes, rocks, dirt, cars, diamonds, gold, land, water, doors.
Who is John D. Rockefeller?
Given the lineage of this historical military aircraft, when was the Avro Arrow first flown and what were the operating characteristics of that flight?
In what year did George Washington die and how old was he?
Why is the sky blue?
Tell me which sport the following athletes play, or played in the past: Michael Jordan, Derek Jeter, Joe Namath, Lebron James, Tiger Woods, Rory Mcilroy, Jackie Robinson, Mike Tyson, Barry Sanders, Tom Brady, Jaromir Jagr, Sydney Crosby, Muhammed Ali, Greg Maddux, Oscar Robertson
Why is pickleball so popular?
How do you change a bicycle tire?
What are common executive roles at large companies?
Netflix views streaming video as a "sustaining" technology that extends its core mail DVD business. Do you agree with this, or do you think streaming video is a "disruptive" technology for Netflix that does not align with its core business and requires a different strategy?
Give me five things to look for in a hot sauce.
Of the following Quentin Tarantino films, which did he just write and direct, and which did he write, direct, and produce?

Reservoir Dogs
Pulp Fiction
Jackie Brown
Kill Bill: Volume 1
Kill Bill: Volume 2
Grindhouse: Death Proof
Inglourious Basterds
Django Unchained
The Hateful Eight
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood
Extract the creator of Amdahl's law from the Wikipedia paragraph.
What is Orchesis - either professional or amateur
Why do people sleep?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Taiko, Vlier
Give me a bulleted list of 3 informal fallacies and the meaning each
What is the largest state in the United States?
What is tollywood?
What is the best season to re-seed your lawn on north east region of USA?
Did Gary Collins played in the NHL
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pandero jarocho, Sallaneh
Why do people live in homes?
In what year was the evidence of an exoplanet first confirmed?
What was the world’s first high level programming language 1957
What are the Pros and Cons of social media?
Write a brief summary of Nezami Ganjavi's Layli and Majnun.
What are the Grand Slams of tennis?
What are some ways to avoid social engineering attacks?
What is Arsenal FC?
As a first time visitor to India, where should I visit?
Classify each of the following as either a plant or an animal: Oak Tree, mouse, grass, daisy, zebra, venus fly trap, hawk, whale.
What was the The second capital of Chandragupta II
Classify each of the following as either a chip or a cracker: Goldfish, Wheat Thins, Pringles, Doritos, Cheez-Its, Lays, Ruffles
What is the best football club in the world in 23 between Arsenal, Real Madrid, Napoli, Manchester City, and Bayern Munich?
What are the names of Daenerys Targaryen's three dragons?
Classify each of these as a cereal grain or legume: wheat, lentils, chickpeas, rye, corn, soybeans, peas, millet
Does Las Vegas have a professional hockey team?
Give me the main facts about the book series about Harry Potter.
Think of different things I could do at the park
Best film in Motion Picture  27th Screen Actors Guild(SAG) Awards was given to which film?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bo, Gaohu
Who is Ali G?
Why are peanuts not kosher for Passover.
Why did the US join WW2?
Write a monologue describing a young woman’s journey to self-actualization in America.
Remove vowels from this text:
Wadi Al Banat's name means ?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
What are five popular songs by Jack Harlow?
Given this paragraph about Outlander, who stars in Outlander?
What kind of protein is used in Biryani?
What kind of dog breed do you get when you mate a poodle with an old english sheep dog?
How did Andy Warhol create the "piss paintings"?
Is it better to live in the city or the suburbs?
Give me a list of the best bodybuilders of all time.
What is measure of inflation in the US?
Which of the following are cities from South India: Bangalore, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Srinagar, Jaipur, Kolkata, Pune, Kochi?
Which country is alphabetically last
What are the words of House Fowler?
Write a letter to my mom to convince her that I should be able to get a cat.
Given the following paragraph on cell structure, what is an example of membrane proteins?
Which component of a PV solar system implements MPPT?
What options does the 911 Carrera T include
How many people live in California?
What is GitHub Actions?
How many maharatna companies are there in India?
Who is the all time leading goal scorer in the NHL?
How can I avoid sunburn?
What are the primary colors?
How do you make brisket on a pellet smoker?
Where is the Ahlatcik village
Hepatitis B and C can cause what type of cancer?
Classify each of the following as a streaming service or cable channel: Netflix, Hulu, Disney+, QVC, ABC, Comedy Central
Name five countries in the Northern Hemisphere
What are the rivers in Rajkot area?
How can one get better at tennis?
What is the state capitol of Nevada?
Why are lemons sometimes considered Alkaline?
Do we live in a simulation? Argue both sides
As a firefighter, you commonly have the following items on you: ax, helmet, pants, jacket, oxygen tank, mask, gloves, boots, hose, shovel, light. Please tell me which of these you wear and which you carry.
How does a tack work in windsurfing?
Why do people use a mobile phone?
What does #956 mean?
What is the difference between a banana and a plantain?
What are the pros and cons of working from home rather than going into an office downtown?
Can you summarize the main points about the first edition of the Dota 2 tournament, The International?
Determine which companies are primarily cloud-software companies and which are semiconductor companies: Intel, Google, Workday, Zscaler, AMD, NVIDIA, and Texas Instruments.
What kind of Toys should be prepare for a new puppy
What are some common types of winter squash for cooking?
What is Brazilian Jiu Jitsu?
Which version of the church existed in 1809?
How many island does Hawaii have?
What Constitutes a Foul in Football?
What are Indic languages?
Can you give me a short summary of the follow paragraph about the history of electronic music?
What is the population in Suwon?
What is best creator's platform
Classify each of the following as either individual sports or team sports: wrestling, boxing, football, basketball, swimming, handball, weightlifting.
what is the difference between ARM and x86 chipsets?
What is Sauvignon blanc?
Why do many of the flags of African countries have similar colors?
Which NFL teams have gone to the Super Bowl only once and won?
Who is Hugo Chavez?
Which of these books won a Pulitzer Prize for fiction? The Road, Lonesome Dove, Ender's Game, Avator the Lost Adventures, Prodigal Summer, The Joy Luck Club, Cloudsplitter, Blink, The Dancer Upstairs, The Known World, Millhauser, All the Light We Cannot See, and Age of Iron,
Q: What is an emergency use authorization and how is it being used to respond to COVID-19?
Write a haiku about cats
What is ChatGPT?
When were the most recent eruptions of Mount Hood?
How many cents do I have if I have 3 dollars and a dime?
Tell me whether the following are public or private universities in the United States: Harvard University, University of Florida, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Cornell University, Amherst College, Colby College, and the University of Michigan Ann Arbor.
What are some novice running tips?
Is a tomato a fruit or a vegetable?
What are popular young adult books?
Given this article about the NSA's ANT Catalog, which hacking tools can be used to monitor a target's key strokes?
Extract the names of the original songs Sandler performed on Saturday Night Live and list them in bullet format.
What is the highest score possible in ten pin bowling?
Which are the five best manufacturers of electric vehicles sold in the United States?
How many miles per year does the average person drive?
Does Alaska have any professional sports teams?
List of Italian horse breeds
Are there still grizzly bears in California?
How many judges did President Trump apoint?
Who was the first human to walk on the moon?
My friend recommended a TV show about kids fighting monsters. It is set in the 80s and one of the kids has magical powers. Do you know what it is called?
What was the Battle of Midway?
What is RBI?
What are some examples of cockney rhyming slang?
Which is a species of fish? Blowfish or Toucan
Categorize  the below names into fishes and insects.
 Hilsa, Catla, Maggot, Mite
Give me a bullet list of 8 different pastel colors I could paint my wall
What is the largest land animal in the world?
Given this paragraph about Himmerland, which is the largest city in Himmerland?
Given this paragraph about ext3, tell me why its better than ext2 and its successor.
What is the average interest rate for a 30 year mortgage in the United States?
Correct the typos in these sentences
What is Occam's razor?
How is the order of the NFL draft determined?
What are the official forms of written Norwegian?
What are the words of House Targaryen?
What is the Pizza history?
Tell me a bulleted list of events that happened in this paragraph grouped by year
What is solar wind?
From this passage, extract the treatments for ACO in a bulleted list.
Classify each job as a "blue collar" or "white collar" job: auditor, electrician, plumber, data scientist, financial analyst, construction worker
What does BATNA stand for?
15 days Europe plan
Give a list of proper nouns in the passage.
Which chapel on Rutger's campus was built 7 years after the New Jersey College for Women?
How many innings are played in a professional baseball game?
Give me a list of south Indian breakfast dishes I should try.
Extract from the following passage two key uses of electricity in modern technology.
What was the primary mode of transportation across the San Francisco bay prior to the Golden Gate Bridge?
How many grandslams are there in Tennis in one year?
What is the oldest type of flight technology?
Please give me a short summary of the misinformed public announcements leading to the fall of the Berlin Wall
What is the right size brad nail for crown moulding?
What is a crypto (cryptocurrency)?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Water buffalo, Eastern honey bee
Classify each of the following universities as public or private: Duke, Wake Forest, University of Florida, Florida Atlantic University, University of Alabama, Harvard, Yale
Which is a species of fish? Panga or Pangea
From the text, extract the locations in which outrigger vessels are present in. Separate them with commas.
What are some of the natural materials used in construction?
Given this text give me short summary about Beavers
As an immigrant , do you miss your country?
Who says Pi is Wrong?
What are some good ski resorts for beginners?
Give me a list of 3 of the best movies quotes I've never used
What were the four groundbreaking papers that Albert Einstein published
Who are the most influential female computer scientists of all time?
What is Flink?
Based on the reference text, provide a bulleted list of the contributing factors causing World War II.
Is the sun a star or a planet?
Classify each of the following as a language or religion: Spanish, Catholicism, Islam, Judaism, Mandarin, Arabic
Given the reference text about Super Bowl LV, please answer the following questions:
1. Who performed at the halftime show?
2. Which team won and what was the final score?
3. Who was the MVP?
4. Where was the game played?
When did Delaware join the United States?
What are the different kind of hits in baseball?
When and where was the first major agitation led by Gandhi, tell me who this agitation was against,  which crop led to this agitation and why this agitation happened.
Tell me whether these foods need to be refrigerated or be frozen: milk, meat, sea food, fruit
What is dialtune drums?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Talempong, Guitar
What are the words of House Baratheon?
Which is heavier: 1kg of flour or 1kg of steel?
What is the California Alpine Club?
The Coquerel's coua species was named after who?
How can I get my dog to stop barking?
Tell me about Roger Federer
In the 2005 Lexus Cup, how many members did each team have?
Give me a list of the top clean beauty brands for women in their 20s
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Hornpipe, Gusli
This table lists the change over time in population of a small town in France. Between  which two consecutive entries from the table did the rate of population growth change the most? Explain your math.
Who spoke at NYU's 2022 commencement?
Why is professional wrestling entertaining?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Electro, Black Lightning
Why is JDAM so cost effective?
How does screen printing work?
What's an unpopular opinion you have?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Balaban, Lute
Give me a list of the great synth-pop artists and a song for each that I might not have heard.
Which city is the best to relocate in Texas
Which is better the Free Software Movement or the Open Source Initiative?
What are the defining characteristics of a Ramly Burger?
Which is a species of fish? Sea bream or Sea shell
Given this paragraph describing the conclusion of the movie Groundhog Day, how did Phil manage to break the cycle and wake up on February 3 instead of back once again on February 2?
How many different Alaska Native tribes are there?
Which of these games are traditionally considered to be board games, and which are card games? Monopoly, Trivial Pursuit, Poker, Snap, Chess, Backgammon, Bridge and Scrabble.
Where can the transmitter for KQKZ be found?
Where should I fly fish for trout in Washington state?
Can planets in the Solar System be seen with the naked eye?
What are good native plants to grow in Ohio?
Where is Hesse's Demi Bastion
What is the difference between guitar and ukulele?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Boobam, Orutu
Who was Neale James Cooper
Who are your 3 favorite Star Wars characters and why?
Given this reference text about the Koala, tell me what makes up most of their diet, how long joeys spend in their mothers' pouches and what are some of the pathogens they are threatened by.
Where is Cabomba sometimes used for decoration but also utility?
My air conditioner quit working how do I fix it?
Who is Sachin Tendulkar?
Extract from the text the main characteristics of the city of São Paulo. Separate them with a comma.
What is the difference between Kuchipudi and Kathak dance forms of India?
What countries are in the European Union?
What size of snowboard should I use?
What are the drawbacks of nuclear fusion?
Give me a list of potential vegan dishes you could make for a Thanksgiving meal
What does AWS stand for?
Where is the Porce III Dam
Who won the 1986 Major League Baseball World Series and in how many games?
Classify the countries based on the continent they belong to - North America or South America with the former as 'north' and the latter as 'south'. United States, Mexico, Canada, Brazil, Columbia, Argentina, Cuba, Jamaica, Chile, Guyana, Peru.
Is there an evolutionary root cause for self-deception?
What is pink salt?
How do you throw a cutter in baseball?
Classify each of the following as a ridesharing or food delivery company: Doordash, Lyft, Wolt, Deliveroo, Bolt, Didi, Rappi
Who wrote the most episodes of season four of Game of Thrones?
Which of the following are perfect square roots? Classify them as 'perfect' and 'not perfect' - 1, 23, 4, 6, 9, 10, 42, 112, 81, 100, 55, 16, 32, 25.
What were the 2 horses represented in greek mythology?
What is a mammal?
According to this reference text about UVA, what years have UVA women won NCAA titles in rowing?
Which team drafted Marques Pope?
What is heavier? A pound of feathers or a pound of iron?
Why do people purchase ski passes?
Compare and contrast the strategy of Tesla to that of Nissan. Why has Tesla been successful in the electric vehicle market while Nissan has yet to?
what are the different types of music genres
In which years did Ernie Wilson play his first and last grand finals?
The Weeknd samples which '80s megahit in "Blinding Lights?"
What is a baseball hat?
Select the odd word from this list and explain why:
Chair
Sofa
Table
Dinosaur
Cupboard
Name 5 different vegetables. List them with dashes
Based on the following passage regarding the economy of Sweden, what is the economic sector that accounts for the largest output?
Given the text about the 2019 Masters Tournament, tell me who won the golf tournament, where the tournament was held and what age the winner was?
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 oldest countries in the world:
What are some vacation ideas this summer?
Who wrote the music and lyrics for Replay?
What's the most important thing in a marriage?
Explain Business Intelligence
What is Sinking Sand?
How do I train for a marathon?
What book was the musical Hamilton based on?
What is the difference between Hunter, Jumper, and Equitation horseback riding?
When he lived in the mountains of Alaska, was Richard Proenneke in full autonomy?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Norman Osborne, Joker
Is social media good for you ?
Write a poem about choosing a sport
Tell me whether these are cats or dogs: French Bulldogs, Ragdoll, British Shorthair, Labrador, Retrievers, Golden Retrievers, German Shepherds, Maine Coon, Poodles, Bulldogs, Persian, Rottweilers, Devon Rex, Beagles.
What is mitosis
Find the price of Osborne 1 from this passage.
Best place to visit for a day from Bangalore
Which US state is best for observing the aurora borealis phenomenon?
What are some quick vegan meals to make?
Where is the Lighthouse Point, Bahamas
Given this paragraph about the history of the Calgary Flames hockey team, what year did the Calgary Flames win their only Stanley Cup
Which notable person in this list with surname Liebers was born last?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion:  Agiarut, Agung
What is non dual philosophy?
Based on the information below, when might people have started baking bread?
Can you tell me what of these are capital cities of their respective countries? Manchester, Madrid, Paris, Milan, London and Munich
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, how many words did the BookCorpus have when it was used to train the first model in OpenAI's GPT series trained in 2018?
Why Miami is so humid?
When did Florida become a state?
Tell me which one does not fit with the group:  Football, Volleyball, Cricket, Chess, Hockey
Who are some famous classical composers?
How many planets make up the Solar System?
Is wolf a domestic or a wild animal?
What is the best data warehouse
Which of the following are currently considered gender neutral names: Jaime, River, Mary, Charlie, Jessie, Rene, John, Maggie, Liam
What was the Great Depression?
Tell me whether these are flowers or fruit: apples, oranges, pineapples, bananas, strawberries, daisies, sunflowers, roses, poppies
What is Project Mosaic?
Let's play a game of tic tac toe. I'll be X and you be O. Unplayed squares will be "_". I'll get first.

_ _ _
_ O _
_ _ _
What is a forest?
What type of poetry is Sappho best known for?
What is the meaning of Life, The Universe, and Everything?
What s epigenomics?
Which is a species of fish? Boga or Bogata
What is the best season to ski?
Given this paragraph about Kevum, explain when it is typically consumed?
What is a synapse notebook?
List the basis of contemporary national legal systems from the passage. Display the results in comma separated format.
Is Ted Yoho republican or democrat
You have to Classify each of the following as either a gluten product or a gluten free product and display it according to their categories: sourdough bread, zucchini, barbecue sauce, hummus, amaranth, commercial chocolate milk
What's the world looks like in 1000 years?
Using the text provided, give me the type of engineers that are involved in fabrication of a solar power plant
What is pleitropy?
What are the two different continental tournaments that Roger Lemerre won ?
What is a NBA super team?
Why do people like California?
Anderson Peters (gold winner) hits the 90 metre mark with a throw of
What is the best part of living in the Midwest?
What language is easy to learn?
Can you write a High Five to a colleague for the partnership at a customer account and the hard work he did?
From the passage identify the areas where cytokines can help the host immune responses. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Name some of the cast members of the movie Spiderman.
Output a table in CSV format of the games mentioned and how many points Ivey scored
Which NFL teams have never gone to the Super Bowl?
What is the best recipe for moonshine
How old was Octavia Butler when she died?
Give me a list of the lines on the London Underground
Which district is Lightwater in?
How would you build me a plane out of duct tape? You can leverage other materials, but the exterior of both the fuselage and the wings must be duct tape.
Who is your favorite player on the Golden State Warriors?
When was world war 2?
How many Alabama football players have won the Heisman?
What are 3 popular dishes that can feed a large group of people?
Who is Geling Yan?
What species of fish are found in the Pamlico Sound?
How many of Farington's buildings are designated Grade 3?
Who wrote the children's novel Swallows and Amazons
Tell me about NGC 7314
Tell me which of these things are fruits or vegetables: Carrot, Apple, Orange, Potato, Peas, Broccoli, Pears
Explain how a Justice is appointed to the US Supreme Court
Q: Am I at risk for serious complications from COVID-19 if I smoke cigarettes?
Identify from the following list characters from The X-Files who are bald or balding: Walter Skinner, John Fitzgerald Byers, Dana Scully, Melvin Frohike, Darius Michaud, Peter Watts, Conrad Strughold, Queequeg
Who founded Amazon?
How many cents do I have if I have 3 dimes?
Where were the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights stored during World War II?
What type of physicist is Arup Kumar Raychaudhuri?
What are some good beginner songs to learn on guitar?
What is the name of the flag carrier airline of the Netherlands?
How many full siblings did Fatemeh Pahlavi have?
Write a short summary of the text below (max 20 words):

Finland’s prime minister, Sanna Marin, has lost her battle to stay in power after her centre-left Social Democratic party (SDP) was narrowly beaten into third place in a cliffhanger election by its conservative and far-right rivals.

With 99.4% of votes counted on Sunday, the right-wing National Coalition party was on course to secure 20.7% of the vote, with the populist, nation-first Finns party predicted to score 20.1%. Marin’s SDP was forecast to collect 19.9%.

Marin congratulated the election winners during her concession speech, but hailed an improvement in both her party’s vote share and its projected number of MPs. “It’s a really good achievement, even though I didn’t finish first today,” she told supporters in Helsinki.

“Democracy has spoken, the Finnish people have cast their vote, and the celebration of democracy is always a wonderful thing,” she added. “We have good reason to be happy about this result.”
Based on this text, what was Ruth Handler's inspiration for making the Barbie Doll?
Which word is different from the rest: cap, turban, veil, hat
How can I become a pilot?
Is the recording of a person's last words reliable?
How do you push start a car with a manual transmission?
What professions are likely to be pursued in Houston?
Extract the different ways to refer to the Amazon rainforest present in the passage. Separate them by a comma.
What is a NFT?
Classify the following list into mammals and non-mammals: dog, human, ant, bird, cat, dolphin, pig, cow, shrimp, coral, shark, honeybee, capybara
What is contemporary style of dance?
In Asia Cricket Cup 2022 ,Player of the match was
What are some fun activities to do in Charlotte, NC?
What is the Tau Circle Constant?
What is Original Joe's restaurant and where are they located?
How many football national championships has the University of Georgia won?
Who invented Calculus?
Give me a summary about the company Nobo
What are the top three most popular collectible cardgames?
Extract the name of the universities Norman Alan Burges studied at from the text. List them using bullets.
Who is the next superpower country?
who is Walt Strony
Best Airline in the world
Extract key reported metrics and their values along with the year the metric is reported from the given text in the format {Metric} - {Year} - {value} and show them as a list
Tell me whether these pokemon are electric or grass type: Pikachu, Bulbasaur, Zapdos, Voltorb, Oddish, Bellsprout
Name a few popular metal genres
Which Taylor Jenkins Reid books have been made into a production (movie or TV)?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pellet drum, Rajao
What is Baumkuchen made of?
Give me a bulleted list of Aaron Fenster's accomplishments.
How is Robert Lugn's leadership characterized?
What is the next big thing after cloud computing ?
which country surrounds India?
From the passage find the major production areas where Avocado is cultivated. Display the results in comma separated format.
During which year Emperor Shapur II learned to play polo?
Extract the various manufacturers and suppliers of the Tomahawk missile and separate them by comma
Where is the best place to vacation in the Bahamas?
What do economists do?
Classify each of the following as either a drink or a food: apple juice, cake, hamburger, carrot, orange juice, soda.
Why do cats purr?
What style of music is played in the World of Warcraft game?
What are close cities to Legonice?
Based on this paragraph when was the last time we sent them to space?
What is the best way to cook a steak?
What is the city of Seattle known for?
What is algebra and who invented it?
What is a group of cats called?
What is your favorite fast-casual restaurant and why?
Write a manifesto for the "Be IRL" movement. The movement advocates being present to your surroundings and fellow humans, vs being immersed in the virtual world created by our smartphones.
Jill, a 60-year-old personal training client, wants to improve her hip flexibility. Identify two exercises commonly done in a Pilates class that would address core strength and flexibility, thus improving Jill's lower back health.
define rainbow clours
Why is soccer the most popular sport in the world?
How do you make Crawfish bread?
Give me a summary of Dataphor based on this text
Write an intro to a startup communications company that no longer exists
What is the capital of Spain and what is it's population?
Who are some of the most influential women's hockey players
Choose the word which is different from the rest: chicken, snake, swan, crocodile, frog
Tell me whether these are TV shows or books: Modern Family, You, Don Quixote, A Tale of Two Cities,  The Little Prince
Describe the governing arrangements provided by the Articles of Confederation. What were the main weaknesses of the document?
Classify each of these items as footwear or headwear: wool hat, snowshoes, baseball hat, bicycle helmet, skis, flippers, and flip flops.
Which artist made the hit song One More Time?
Who succeeded Howard Schultz as Chairman of Starbucks Corporation on June 2018?
How often do Germans vote?
What is the difference between a clan and a tribe
What US state has the most coastline?
Who are the considered to be the best soccer players of all time, and what countries are they from?
What is Redshift?
Why do audiophiles spend lots of money on high-end audio equipment and does more expensive gear always sound better than less expensive hardware?
I am going to Stockholm over the weekend, what should I do? I love going to museums and being in nature!
In what year did the Pac-10 Become the Pac-12?
Which of the following months have 31 days? Classify them as 'yes' or 'no'. January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December.
What is paella?
What is the biggest fish in the ocean?
Provide a bulleted summary of the history of how home-field advantage is determined for the World Series.
Who is Ronald Peter Nash
Name three countries where Arabic is the official language.
What's the best place to visit China?
When was the the docu-series 'The Circus' created?
What is the capital of Florida?
How does a human do arithmetic calculation as fast as a calculator?
Based on the autopsy, list the contributing factors to Farley's death in bullet format.
Extract name and the type of water body from this text and list them using bullets in the format {Name}-{River}
What type of chair would I want to design to give an option to lean all the way back?
Exact all the names related to 'Qin' in the paragraph
What professional tournaments did Liang win during his career?
Given this paragraph about mushroom growth, why is it related to the English language expression "to mushroom"?
Why Mauritius is famous
Does Bolivia have two capital cities?
Why we need music?
Is art useless?
Which ingredients does a margarita pizza consist of?
What is the difference between a Transformation and Action in Spark?
Can you describe a colour you cannot see?
What is the field of study that looks at tissues and their structure?
Where is Koenigsfeld
Tell me which of these characters are from the Mario universe: Yoshi, Zelda, King Kong, Luigi, Princess Peach, Link, Bowser, Alex Rodriguez.
What is the Foresight discipline?
Who wrote Democracy in America?
Extract the islands that are part of the Madeira and Savage Islands archipelagos in Portugal. Separate them with a comma.
What are some of the top risks around LLMs?
Write about something you hate.
What are Bengali famous food ?
What does the phrase “ignorance is bliss” mean?
Summarize Tiger Woods professional golf career.
Given these paragraphs about the Tesla bot, what is its alias?
Where is the basketball Hall of Fame?
Who is Charles Brigstocke?
from the given text can you please create a list of events associated with life of Brandon Beane.
How many total men fought at Kosovo Field according to text?
Name five NBA teams in the Western Conference.
What did Bobby Moore die from?
Did Professor Snape jinx Harry's broom during his first quidditch match?
What can be done about NRA and why gun control is such an issue?
how do you rate strength of tornado
What is celiac disease?
What are the different ways to bake sourdough?
Who are some of the most influential innovators of all time?
Classify each of the following as either a Girl Scout cookie, an ice cream flavor from Ben & Jerry's, or a title of an episode from the TV show "The X-Files": The Unnatural, Phish Food, Samoas, Do-Si-Dos, Tagalongs, Post Modern Prometheus, Americone Dream, The Field Where I Died, Caramel deLites, Half Baked, Cherry Garcia, Patient X, Thin Mints, Chunky Monkey, Bad Blood
Why some people like spicy food?
Given the reference text below, what is Safer Internet Day?
My 12-year-old daughter asks me: "Why can't I have my own cellphone? Everyone else in my class have one. Without a cellphone, I cannot make friends with them, and I cannot join their conversations. I feel lonely and sad." How to properly respond to my daughter? Shall I give her a cellphone or not?
Describe how skateboarding teaches you about life and to be resilient.
What's the best piece of advice you ever received?
What kind of species is the Eulima venusta
What were the last ten states to enter the union of the United States?
What is the most popular sport?
How can you tell how old a tree is?
What are the Australian men's and women's soccer teams called?
Where was the 7th edition of Slinex conducted?
Tell me which of the following are states in the United States of America: Washington, Oregon, California, Idaho, Toronto, Canada, England.
Given this reference text, what was John Dalberg-Acton's most famous pronouncement, and to whom did he make it?
Tell me if these are examples of fine art mediums: painting, sculpture, architecture, music, poetry
Given these paragraphs about battery storage power stations, for how long battery power storage was cheaper than open cycle gas turbine power as of 2019?
Why is Massachusetts known as the Bay State?
Please provide details on  Brisbane International tournament with given text as a reference
Explain how sampling bias in Voice Of Customer research could adversely affect a marketing analysis of customers' post-purchase experience with a product.
Why did people stop using Perl?
What type of creatures undergo Metamorphosis?
What is "A Song of Ice and Fire"?
Who was Margaret Thatcher?
What is a console war in video games?
Does structured streaming support joins?
Can you name five of the most successful professional golfers in history?
Summarize Clemson University to me
Given this paragraph about full distance ironman competition, how far is each discipline
Why do babies cry?
Given a reference text about Connie Passalacqua Hayman, tell me when and where taught journalism.
Given a reference text about Pablo Picasso, tell me when and where he was born, why he was famous, and what his most famous accomplishment was as a professional
From the following passage extract information on how dates were used in the Fertile Crescent.
What does the company Navibulgar do
How do I kick someone out of a meeting room?
What is sweep rowing?
Among those animals, what are mammals? platypus, Greenland shark, puffer fish, rattlesnake, orca, kangaroo, ostrich
Bike or Car?
Think up a creative and weird alternative way for me to protect my phone if I don't want to purchase a phone case.
Is there a New York Hotel in Salt Lake City
What are some good kids activities on Lake Norman, NC?
What theme park in the world has the highest cumulative attendance?
List of American films of the 1890s
Given a reference text about bull sharks, tell me the gestation period for bull sharks.
Should I buy a house or invest in a stock market?
Who was the first country to win the cricket world cup in their home soil
Tell me about Indiana
What is a yellow or red card in soccer?
What football team did Jerome Bettis play for?
What does the phrase "the Carolinas" refer to?
Based on the information provided, what was the controversy surrounding the 2021 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix?
What is the best tea  near Bangalore
How is Delta Lake related to Apache Spark?
Was Alexander Skarsgård destined to become an actor?
What breed is most likely to win a dog show
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kakko, Akonting
What is it like to live on the moon?
What are mammals?
How do solar panels work?
Using examples from the text, list some popular songs from the album For Bitter or Worse.
classify the following as good stuff vs bad stuff:
inflation
wars
collaboration
renewable energy
soil erosion
peace
harmony
violence
bloodshed
From the passage provided, extract the year Kabaddi was added to Asian Games
Given a reference text about Lotus Mark IX, who designed the car?
Where should I go this summer?
Given a reference text bout the Tampa Convention Center, when did it open and how big is it?
Is it possible to build a society that runs completely on socialism without any capitalism elements?
Classify each of the following as an "Indoor Activity" or an "Outdoor Activity": Hiking, Watching TV, Cooking, Surfing, Gardening
Who is the best CEO in the world
Where is the Rudka County
Given this paragraph about the Women's Education Association, which institutions of higher learning had affiliations with the Association?
As per the passage which schools of Hinduism discuss Ishvara?
Is FreeBSD a Linux distribution?
What was the home port of the Aquila?
What entree is associated with American Thanksgiving?
What causes earthquakes?
What empire was Augustus the leader of?
Given this paragraph, who wrote "Greenmantle?"
Where is the best place in my home to store valuable and sensitive documents?
What are three ways of drying clothes.
What are the cutest animals on the planet?
How would you categorize the following sports into two groups; football, rugby, cricket and baseball
List the best toys for toddlers?
What is an operating model for AI?
Who was Nikola Tesla?
Which programming languages did Netscape try to add to their browser in order to make it more dynamic?
Give me a list of artists and bands associated with City Pop genre that gained popularity in 70s and 80s Japan
What is mass spectrometry?
Given a reference text about Joseph A. Garcia, tell me what high school and college he attended.
From the passage mention the different educational institutions which Musk attended. Display the results in comma separated format.
Classify each of the following as inclined or flat: stairs, beach, mountain, lake, escalator, pond, ramp
With reference to given text, Please provide a list of dangers associated with Smoking
How Long can a Goalkeeper Hold the Ball with his Hands?
Why was revenge of the jedi renamed to return of the jedi?
What is the difference between whole genome sequencing (WGS) and whole exome sequencing (WES)?
Given the reference text about AC Milan, how many FIFA and UEFA trophies have they won?
Give me a list of things that could be found on a desk
Given this paragraph about the Mercury Seven. Who did not survive to reach retirement and what was the cause of their death?
What is a good dad joke?
Given this reference text about the Grateful Dead, tell me who their keyboard players were over the years.
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Malawi or Norfolk Island.
Mzuzu, Blantyre, Kingston, Lilongwe
Classify each of the following as either characters from books by Anne Rice or Stephanie Meyer: Lestat de Lioncourt, Memnoch, Lasher, Armand, Yvette, Bella Swan, Edward Cullen, Jacob Black, Melanie Stryder, The Seeker
Why do dogs make great pets?
Which is a species of fish? Cisco or Palo Alto
What is the difference between AWS ECS and EKS?
Should a human be happy all the time?
Why might YouTube employees be sensitive about guns?
Classify each of the following colors as primary or secondary: orange, red, blue, green, purple, yellow.
When was "I'm Just a Singer (In a Rock and Roll Band)" released?
How many years has it been since the city of Calcutta was officially renamed Kolkata?
What is a haiku?
Spanish patatas bravas are potatoes served with a red sauce made with tomatoes and chilis. Could patatas bravas have existed in 1490?
Given a reference text on the beginnings of triathlon, tell me where the event was first held, in what year, and what sport was first in the sequence of the race.
Where was Atlassian founded?
What is one of your favorite hobbies?
What is archaeology?
Order these cars as either 'fast', 'slow' or 'dangerously fast'. A Doge Viper, Toyota 4Runner, Lamborghini Aventador, Chrysler Pacifica, Go-Kart, Lime Scooter, Porsche 911, Corvette
Which phrases are French and which words are English: mon frère, c'est la vie, good morning, what's up, break the ice, bite the bullet, and je suis désolé.
Which French philosopher created analytical geometry
Can you explain the Keto diet and ketosis?
Where was the beer Yuengling founded?
From the paragraph about the painting, "The Little Street", tell me the painting's significance with reference to the Dutch Golden Age in that period.
Based on the following passage what are positive and conventional current?
Give me three different ways to reuse a paper grocery bag.
Who are the top 3 professional basketball players of all time?
Give a comma-separated list of the different genes influencing horse coat colors according to the text
Is the harmonic distribution a discrete distribution?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Djembe, Dotar
Which of the following are used in cricket? Classify as 'cricket' and 'not cricket' - bat, wickets, ball, pitch, boundary, six, four, goal, touchdown, strike, out, duck, powerplay, set, defender, goalkeeper.
What was Britain called - before it was Britain
Describe euphoria
Who are U2
What is Impala?
Name some fruits that have red skin.
Extract the train tracks mentioned in this text, and make a list that mentions whether they have a platform or not in the format {track #number} - {yes/no}
Why is it hard to have a baby and keep a job?
What is a good way to convince someone to do something
How is a circular economy different than the USA's economy?
What is the value of x if x^2 = 4?
Identify all PII in this customer review "My name is Joe Smith and email address is joesmith9999@gmail.com. I'd like to leave a review about Langton's red wine. It was tasty for a red, but there were sediments at the bottom of my bottle"
How difficult is it to learn how to water ski?
Which of these are characters in Ted Lasso: Rebecca Welton, Olivia Benson, Jamie Tartt
Please give me  the potential implications of overfitting described in the following text
Where do chia seeds come from?
The following words describe 'active' or 'passive' types of engagement. Identify which are 'active' and which are 'passive': create, consume, participate, build, make, watch, listen, and lead.
Name some rap albums that were released in 2022.
Extract the date and place of birth for Henning Bertil Stjernfelt from the passage provided.
When and where did Pokemon Go first launch?
What is data science?
Name top 10 companies from the Fortune 500 list in 2022
What is the Auburn Ski Club?
What happened at the height of the American revolution?
What type of music are you into?
Classify each of the following as either a state or a city
IsNarcissus tete a tete a flower
Given this paragraph about KITS, tell me what station it's on and where its radio tower is located.
List five titles by Suzanne Collins.
What is Pinot Grigio?
Given this text, tell me the inventor of the Rueben sandwich and where it was invented.
Give me a list of some nice Vegetarian Indian dishes
From the passage provided, extract Tagore's nickname
Write a list of items that are “must buys” at Costco
Which TV Show is about a zip code in Beverly Hills?
What makes a healthy diet?
List the number of warehouses Costco has. Segregate based on location in a descending order. Use the format ‘ Number of warehouse : Location’.
What is the name of Frankenstein's monster?
What was Dick Lammi's most famous work?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Wallis and Futuna or Morocco.
Casablanca, El Kelaa des Srarhna, Mata-Utu, Fès, Leava
What kind of publisher is the American Fantasy Press
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Atabaque, Ajaeng
Please give a simple list of reasons that extraterrestrial intelligence may not exist or is very rare
Name some Nobel Prize winners
What is the difference between check and checkmate?
What is solar minimum and how it is related to sun cycle?
Name three poems by William Wordsworth.
Who are the best starting MLB pitchers of all time?
What are some useful ways to repurpose a cardboard box?
Given the passage below, tell me how many Grammy Awards, Emmy Awards, and Billboard Music Awards Taylor Swift has won and how many simultaneous entries she had on the Billboard Global 200 when she had the most simultaneous entries for an artist.
Give me list of main cast of Friends TV show
How did you prepare for your business case competition?
Which American president appears on a one-dollar bill?
Is it safe to invest in stocks?
From the passage provided, extract the names of Jawaharlal Nehru's parents. Separate them with a comma.
What is the best seasoning to use on steak?
What watch should I buy?
Where do bears live?
Which of the following can fly: bird, cow, cat, dog, car, helicopter, drone, bike, pot, butterfly, feather?
Make a bullet list of some different ways that a kid can make some money
Who won a gold medal alongside Waters in the coxed four?
What is Hinton's citizenship?
Tell me whether these instruments are stringed or percussion: Cello, Cymbals, Triangle, Harp
Given this reference text about Delta Lambda Phi, during which years was the DLP fraternity not the fastest growing fraternity in the US?
From the passage provided, extract the total product revenue and % YoY growth using format: {$x} product revenue with {x%} YoY growth

Product revenue of $555.3 million in the fourth quarter, representing 54% year-over-year growth
Remaining performance obligations of $3.7 billion, representing 38% year-over-year growth
7,828 total customers
Net revenue retention rate of 158%
330 customers with trailing 12-month product revenue greater than $1 million
Authorized a $2.0 billion stock repurchase program
how can we prevent the best river floods?
What is a baby cat called?
Give me ideas how I could become more productive.
Eggs are expensive these days. Should I rear my own chickens instead?
What are some of the things to know about New York City?
What is the meaning of life?
Create a beginner-intermediate push-pull-legs workout routine that I can do 6 times a week.
Who is George R.R. Martin?
Is this hockey, baseball, or both?
Why did George HW Bush lose the presidency?
Give me a list of the last five "best rap song" Grammy winners (just tell me the song name and the performing artist).
Identify and briefly discuss four “commandments” for effective presidential relations with the Congress. Do you think a president needs a good relationship with Congress to be an effective president?
What functions have political parties served in American politics? Assess the strength of each aspect of the U.S. political parties—the party in government, the party as organizations, and party in the electorate.
Who is LBJ?
FATF was established in which year?
What are the classical states of matter?
What's the difference between a knot, a hitch and a bend?
Based on the reference paragraph, when was the 149th Boat Race?
Imagine you are planning a menu for Thanksgiving Dinner. Build out a meal with two main dishes, four side dishes and two desserts. I have an aunt with Celiac disease who is vegetarian, so make sure there are options for vegetarians and people with celiac disease in each course, and explain what my aunt can eat in each part of the meal
What is reserve requirement?
How much of the earth is covered in land?
Based on the reference text about coffee, tell me where coffee plants are primarily grown and the most common bean types.
Given this reference text, what are column stores used for?
Can Solar panels help you maintain power during a storm ?
What factors should I consider before becoming a dog owner?
Who was the winner of Top Chef Season 4?
What is the difference between an electric field and gravitational field?
What are good plants to have in your home if you have cats?
Which of the following cars are made by GM? Grand Cherokee, Blazer, F150, Bronco, Corvette
Based on the given text, please tell me which region and country a Troll Cross originated in, and what its intent is.
Given this paragraph about the Republic of Finland becoming a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) what year did it start a formal relations with NATO?
Change the following to past tense
What are some of the highest-rated episodes of The X-Files, based on viewer's ratings?
What is the color of tennis balls?
Provide me some details about United States attorneys with the given text as a reference.
Classify the following based on what kind of animals they are.
rodentia, chiroptera, lizards, primates, crocodiles, soricomorpha, turtles, snakes
What was the first functional submarine called?
What are three popular mezzo-soprano arias?
Which medical tool was developed by Sanctorius in 1612
Classify each of the following as either a flying or aquatic animal: salmon, eagle, dolphin, whale, octopus, bat, goose
In climbing, what is a hand jam?
What is Venezuela?
Where is the first Summer Olympics held?
What are good tips to drive in the snow?
What is Pinot Noir?
Who was the US president when WWII ended?
Who was Henry Ford?
Give me a list of actresses who won an Oscar in the last 5 years and tell me for which movie they won it.
If Rosslyn Mountain Boys had produced two more albums, how many albums would they have produced?
What is the show Parks and Rec about?
Extract from the paragraph the winner of the 2022 World Snooker Championship.
What makes Alabama Football coach Nick Saban so good at his job?
What is it inflation?
When did Harriet live in the Andaman Islands?
What is Delta Lake?
Why do people use computer mice?
Give me a list of the best bikes for riding on roads.
What dispatchable source of power on electric grids are faster than battery storage power stations?
How do banks make money?
Which animal is associated with Chengdu?
What was the Golden State Warriors win-loss record in the 1964-65 season ?
Which country has the most inhabitants?
Which of the following two-dimensional shapes are made using only curved lines? And which use only straight lines? oval, rectangle, square, pentagon, circle and rhombus.
Identify the bird from the list: Pendulum, Bewick's swan, Iceberg
Extract the names of Jesse LaFollette's grandchildren from the provided passage
Given this paragraph about hockey what are different surfaces that hockey is played on?
Where can you find the Citron-bellied attila?
What does HEMA stand for? ​​
Why are some reasons to vacation in New Zealand?
What is a mutual fund?
Why is the United States Military Academy called West Point?
Name three movies with Denzel Washington.
Which bird flies the farthest?
Why was the model T only produced in black?
Give me a list of the most famous tech companies in the world
Write a story about a man who finds a magic lamp that has a genie inside. The genie should grant him wishes and the story should conclude with a tragic ending.
Why were the original Old English Bible translations created?
What is an index fund?
How Is Linux Licensed?
How to be rich?
Who is the current manager of Arsenal Football Club?
Given this paragraph about Jack Kerouac, tell me where he was raised, what was his most famous book, when was that book published, and which movement was he a part of?
Why do Jewish holidays begin at sunset the night before?
Based on the given text, List some aspects of the pearl.
What is a personality test?
Name some titles from the Goosebumps series.
What is the best kind of bread?
What were the main results of applying statistical analysis to the English language?
Based on the provided paragraph give a bullet list of the names of the countries (regions) which took part in WWI and their reasons?
Create a bulleted list of Hawking's accomplishments based on this passage.
What is the Family of the orchid Bulbophyllum concatenatum?
Who is the first African-American to perform at the Metropolitan Opera?
What is Type 2 Diabetes?
How do I see how large a dataset is in Spark?
How many people live in the city of Oakland in 2022?
Let’s solve the following math problem. Each rabbit has 4 feets and each duck has 2 feets. If there are in total 25 heads and 88 feets, how many rabbits and how many ducks are there?
Name some famous songs by the Beatles
What kind of boat should I purchase?
What was Seward's Folly?
What are the main components of AWS Kinesis?
Give me a list of video game systems from the past few decades
Are these things heavy or light? Empty soup bowl, empty shipping container, couch, pillow, apple, pencil, mattress
Classify each of the following words as either a noun or a verb
What is the best place in Thailand
Provide a list of some Japanese art forms I've not heard of.
What is combinatorial optimisation?
What is a Keystone?
How best should I travel from London to Edinburgh, UK ?
How can teachers address health disparities in society?
What are the best woods for smoking?
Without quoting directly from the text, give me a summary of how rainbows are formed.
Who is Taehoon Oh?
Give me a bulleted list of cricketers by highest number of international centuries scored
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Indian Elephant, Irish Elk
Provide a bullet point list of all primary matter phase transitions, with the name of the process following by the matter states involved  Use the format: {process name}: {initial state} -> {final state}
Based on this passage about UCLA, tell me the difference between North Campus and South Campus and which residential areas border the campus.
Should superheroes be allowed to break the law?
Based on the provided information, when will we achieve AGI?
Which of the following are movies with the actor Deepika Padukone?
What's the first 3 things you do when you wake up in the morning ?
From the paragraph about Space Needle, tell me where is located, when it was built, how tall the monument is and one more tourist fact about it.
What are some practical applications of Burnside's lemma in combinatorics based on this passage?
What are the unethical behaviors in the corporate world? Illustrate with an example.
Identify the bird from the list: Canada Dry, Canada goose, Goosebumps
what are the benefit of meditation?
What city is Microsoft Based in?
How many national high school records does Shana Woods currently hold based on the paragraph?
What are the two major bacterial pathogens of Anaplasma bacteria?
are GSIs important to being a global company
Extract the locations where Nachum lived from the text below and list them in alphabetical order and separated by a semicolon.
Who are the best college football programs of all time?
Which is the capital of Union Territory of Ladakh ?
Give me a list of Tour de France general Classification winners who have won more than 4 times.
Given a reference text about a singer, tell me when they debuted, what their first release was, and what their most popular song is.
What are Arabic numerals?
From the passage provided, extract the date of birth of Gandhi
What is the only established city of the Dothraki people?
Classify each of the following as either a Sega or Nintendo game: Super Mario Bros, Sonic the Hedgehog, Altered Beast, Road Rash, Legend of Zelda, Ecco the Dolphin, ToeJam & Earl, Metroid, Chrono Trigger, Donkey Kong Country
What stroller should I buy for my newborn baby?
Based on the following paragraph, list the weather conditions associated with summer around the world.
Provide a 10-step flow for a heterosexual couple's non-religious wedding ceremony.
Tell me whether these are shoes or clothing brands: Nike, Tommy Hilfiger, Adidas, Levi's, Reebok, Puma, Wrangler.
The Death of Socrates was painted by whom?
Why did Georges think that Helene redirected her affections towards Walter Rogers?
What are fast recipes to make for dinner?
Write a short blog post about why you have chosen to delete your instagram account and why you think that instagram has an negative impact on society.
What is the capital of Maine?
Given a reference text about the 2008 Pittsburgh Pirates season, what was their record for the season?
Name a battlefield surgeon
What's the best baseball team?
please give me a short description about SVB collapse
Different uses for glass
Give me some suggestions for good South East Asian restaurants near downtown Seattle
According to the passage, mention some of Taylor’s hit songs after signing for Republic records.
What is Active Directory?
Who invented the computer?
What is the Phillips curve?
Extract the essential tools for a mini survival kit from the following Wikipedia article.
Think up a short list of the best US Presidents
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dholak, Sitar
Why do people like to ski?
Where was the first capital of Alaska?
Based on the following paragraph, list the Himalayan peaks that were surveyed and identified during the 19th century.
What is the difference between football and soccer?
Why is steam important when making bread?
What are three tips to a successful fishing outing?
Extract the awards that Caitlin Clark won during her Junior year season at Iowa State.
What is observer bias
Who is the lead singer of Korn?
When did the Post Office in Mission Beach first open?
Which trophies have West Ham won?
Briefly summarize this paragraph on a Pearl Harbor conspiracy theory.
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 most recent Pakistani Prime Ministers
When did Porsche stop producing air-cooled engines in the 911?
How do people get where they want to go
What are some common types of lettuce used in salad and other dishes?
Where can I go to find out what is on the ballot for any given election in Wisconsin?
Give me a list of the best movies I've never seen.
Give me a list of Premier League winners and runners-up in the last 5 years.
Of the cities listed, which was furthest from the station?
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: pint, millilitres
What is Allsvenskan?
How would you describe genomics?
Explain Storage Credential and External locations used in conjunction with Unity Catalog to a five year old.
Give me a list of things to ask while triaging a support ticket
Was the hermit hummingbird hawkmoth described in the 20th or 21st century?
Where are the best places to buy hardware supplies?
What are some modern examples of companies that have harnessed the power of network effects?
I am planning a trip to Spain. I am interested in culture, museums and art, but I also want to go to the beach and have great food. What are 5 places that I should definitely visit?
Who is the visual of the kpop group Twice?
There are many different types, styles and genres of dance. Categorize these dances based on the their style;

Mambo, Kizomba, Robot, Jazz dance, Lady hop, Rumba, west coat swing, Boogaloo, blues
What are common gaming consoles used to play video games?
Who is Bryan Adams
Is it safe to invest in cryptocurrency?
Give me three reasons why cactuses aren't real.
Given a reference text about dried spaghetti production, what is required to produce spaghetti without errors?
What is an acoholic?
Which English football club has won the most FA Cup trophies?
What are the most important metrics for a Sales Leader?
What’s it like living in NYC compared to other US cities?
Why is my buttercream frosting not white?
Given this paragraph are Beavers the largest living rodents?
Who developed Pilates?
What is Equity theater?
What type of products does this company produce?
What is sourdough bread?
What is considered as DACH region?
What is 75 hard and what are the tasks?
What can people do to entertain cats?
Tell me about the album The Any Day Now
What is the use of a vaccine?
What are Gummi Bears called in England?
What is the difference between bills, notes, and bonds?
What steps can I take to avoid getting hit by a falling window from a skyscraper while walking about in downtown during high winds?
What cause toe fungus?
Tell me whether each of these positions is in soccer or baseball: shortstop, outfielder, midfielder, forward, goalie, catcher
Which country is the state of Illinois apart of?
What are three popular movies with Steve Carell?
What are the main ingredients of deviled eggs and what are some unique add-in ideas?
What is Your Lie in April about?
What is the best private Jesuit research university in Boston ?
Given this reference on Yorkshire Terriers, tell me where they originate from, and what are their typical size and color.
Why is the Chrysler Hemi V8 so legendary?
Provide all the key information about how the look and the names for the white ibis
Who is Laika and why is she famous?
What is wholesale banking?
Classify these foods as proteins or carbohydrates
what are the rules of cricket ?
Give this paragraph abount Battle of Adwa between Ethiopia and Italy, who were the commanders on Ethiopian side.
If I give you a list of weapons, can you break them into melee and ranged. The list is knife, bow, axe, shotgun, mace, whip, rifle and cannon.
Tell me a terrifying fact about moray eels.
What is the climbing history summary of Gurla Mandhata?
Extract the current points scoring table for current Formula 1's grand prixs in the form of [Place of Finish- Points Scored]
Which of the following countries are in Europe and which are in the rest of the world: Nicaragua, Australia, Austria, New Zealand, Morocco, Spain, Greece, China, Chile?
Which of the following foods could a vegan eat and which would they have to avoid: egg, almond milk, cheese, gelatin, chicken noodle soup, lettuce, and bread.
Why are sports so popular?
Why would an oil and gas exploration company utilize directional drilling in their drilling program?
Given a reference text about Hackpad, what company acquired it?
List the actors and actresses who were included in the cast of the movie Avengers: Endgame.
Is cricket game popular in some parts of the world?
From the passage provided, extract the name of the first non-European to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Who was William P. Bolton
From the passage provided, extract the city where Elizabeth Taylor's parents were from
What are some of the best vegan protein sources
What was the first living creature sent into orbit around Earth?
What is a hadron?
What are the songs on the album At Basin Street?
To acquire Swedish citizenship by naturalisation what should be the minimum age of the applicant and what documents are required.
Tell me if the following music pieces are considered classical music, jazz music or pop music? The magic flute, Kind of blue, Wish you were here, Bach's Saint John Passion, Take five, We are the champions.
Who is the best cricketer in the world
How can I make every color of paint?
What is postmodernism?
Which is the largest American Football stadium
Who are the last 7 men's icc world cup winners in ODI?
Which season three episode did Alik Sakharov direct in Game of Thrones?
which country has the least diverse food?
What does the software company Teamwork do and where is it located
In YAML tell me a list of teams mentioned in the text. It should be in the form `location: ${location}`, `mascot: ${mascot}`
Mahatma Gandhi gave a slogan on Aug 8, 1942 .What was the slogan?
What does a typical financial planning and analysis team structure consist of?
What is the right time to do workouts or yoga?
Name three dishes that were developed from conditions of scarcity or having to "make do” with available materials or ingredients.
Who are the greatest players that have played for Manchester United?
When was the last financial crisis and what caused it?
What was the first toy to be advertised on television?
What are specific reasons for seasons?
What is a knowledge base?
What city is WFSD Radio licensed to?
tell me whether these are European or American cities: New York, Milan, Paris, Chicago, San Francisco, London
Are UGGs considered fashionable?
How to choose the next company you work for?
What are the India’s Foreign Exchange Reserves as on week ended Sept 23, 2022?
Extract which animals Waddell played with and which ones he fought with from the text. Separate them with a comma, putting the ones he played with first.
Who recorded the song Ghost Town
Why don't women have beards?
How do sailplanes (gliders) stay aloft?
Of these senior crew members of the HMS Bounty, which turned out to be mutineers and which were loyalists:  William Bligh, John Fryer, Fletcher Christian, William Cole, William Peckover, William Purcell, William Elphinstone, Thomas Ledward, John Hallett, Thomas Hayward
Name a good ski mountain in Vermont
What is the company zoom?
Tell me whether these are famous as actors or authors: Russell Crowe, Tom Hanks, Jamie Lee Curtis, Joanne Woodward, Sara Jessica Parker, Tom Cruise, Alexander Dumas, JK Rowling, Ingrid Bergman, Grace Kelly,  Judi Dench, Kate Winslet, Jodie Foster, Doris Day, William Shakespeare, Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
Who is Lee Jung-sik
Can cats communicate?
What was the relationship of the person who became MD at Grandmaster Capital Management to Paypal?
What is SaaS?
What family was well known for their power in Renaissance Italy?
Classify each of the shapes as having 3, 4, or 5 sides: square, rectangle, pentagon, rhombus, triangle
Is the headquarters of Surrey County Council in Surrey?
How long does it take to golf 18 holes?
What is the solar system?
Which is a species of fish? Lizard or Lizardfish
Tell me whether these are dogs or cats: bulldogs, poodles, huskies, collies, shepherds
tell me about the whole world
Extract the years that Ayrton Senna da Silva won the Formula One World Championship, and put them separated by comma.
Extract the Greek cities mentioned in the below text and list them from smallest to largest
For whom is Daenerys Targaryen's dragon, Viserion, named for?
Do Africans share the same origin and culture?
What is St. Peters Basilica?
What are the best cliffs in Ireland?
Who was the first computer programmer?
Who is Silvio Micali?
What are some of the famous festivals of India?
What is the name of Google's email service?
What is the meaning of life?
Given a polynomial x^2 + 2x + 1, what is x?
Give me a list of the best cell phone brands besides Apple
When is the best time of year to visit the Smoky Mountains?
Write a few sentences about why people who live in the Bay Area of California are moving to the Sacramento area.
When did the maximum rate of water usage begin to be mandated?
How was Napoleon defeated?
Given this question about tourism, what country is the 6th most visited country?
Give me an idea for a country to travel to that is safe, inexpensive and does not fall into the well trodden tourist path?
Why do we watch television?
What streaming shows are worth binging right now?
What is electrostatics the study of?
From the below text about MS Dhoni, tell me what they were most famous for?
When did World War II finish?
Who is the Zurich Insurance
How accurate are future weather forecasts?
Tell me who are the top 5 leading scorers of all time in the NBA
Extract the most famous songs of the slashtones in a comma separated list.
Classify these programming languages to compiled or interpreted: shell script, erlang, rust, python, javascript, C++, go
What are Riot Games' most popular games?
What is the state capital of Nevada?
Why is the glass ceiling better for minority women?
What are some of the most important attributes of spacecraft battery and how are these attributes realized?
Why many people do not like pigeons?
What is the reported biodiversity of Costa Rica?
Imagine you are a grandparent who wants a grandchild. Write a persuasive argument to your children.
Give me a list of the teams that have won the English Premier League
What is the population of Canada?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Velociraptor, Pacific Salmon
Which of the following is not a Hemsworth brother? Chris, Liam, Reginald, Bobert, Robert, Luke
What does kwon mean in taekwondo?
Extract the reasons the Atcama Desert is one of the driest places on earth and list them in bullet format.
What was the primary reason for constructing the Berlin Wall?
how to get started with data science and machine learning?
From the text provided, extract the name of the most profitable public banking company in Sri Lanka. Include the profit and revenue in US dollars.
Who was the lead singer for the band Aerosmith?
Given this paragraph about Twitch, during what year did twitch have more than 100 million viewers per month?
What is structural biology?
What country most recently joined NATO?
Where was Old French language spoken?
How should I pick a name for my baby?
What are some highlights of Lionel Messi's career goals?
How can I go from my couch to running a 5K in 3 months?
What is the best breakfast to order when out with friends?
Who are Sinti people?
Given a reference text about Joseph Charlton, what college football team did he play for?
Does Arizona use Daylight Savings?
Why should you live in Florida?
What famous character did William B. Davis portray?
Based on the above passage what are the heavier elements which are more fissionable?
Write a leave letter to your teacher.
Name ten Shakespeare plays
How many countries in Europe do have the Euro as monetary currency?
What did the Triceratops use their horns for?
How to become a millionaire?
What are Singapore main geographical points according to this text? Bullet point please.
How many variants of the PrintNightmare existed?
provide the list of the List of American foods that is related to breeds
write some critical points on University of Sfax using below text as a reference
What are some great comets named after people?
What is a sleeping bag?
From the following list of movies, please tell me which ones are comedies, dramas, horror, or action: When Harry Met Sally, The Exorcist, The Godfather, Mission Impossible
Who is David Dicks?
What is the difference between a violin and a viola?
Who would win between a boxer and an MMA fighter?
Why you need to save Money
What is a stock index?
list 7 favourite flavours
Tell me whether each airline is American or European: British Airways, United Airlines, Southwest Airlines, Jet Blue, Easy Jet, Ryan Air
Given this text, summarize the major events in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 game development and release.
Describe a plan for a road trip from Las Vegas to West Grand Canyon, including stops for visiting Hoover Dam and lunch. Your plan should include a budget, a timeline, and a description of the sights, for a group of 7 friends.
Extract the number of men and women living in the municipality of Paradela and list them using bullets in the format {men} - {number} and {woman} - {number) in a comma separated format.
What are the co-founders of Tesla Motors?
What is the difference between a refractor telescope and a reflector telescope?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Celesta, Masenqo
What should I do if I disagree with a friend, co-worker or family member on something I feel passionate about, such as politics?
What is the Indianapolis 500?
From the passage provided, extract the country which hosted the 2022 world cup.
How to lose weight?
Which company built the F-22 Raptor?
From the passage mention the name of the kids of Nita Ambani. Display the results in comma separated format.
Give me a list of 1980s computer games.
What are the names of five of the best Pokemon cards and why?
Who is Frank Lloyd Wright, and why is he famous?
Who is Juliette Roche?
What was Selective Service Act?
Is the sun hot?
Classify each of the following as either a Carnivore or a Herbivore: Cow, Shark, Zebra, Lion, Wolf, Elephant, Tiger, Deer, Leopard, Cheetah
Which of the following numbers is a irrational number: -200, -1.5, -1, 0, 1, 1.5, 200, pi, e, sqrt(-1)?
Given the reference paragraph, when was the CUBC formed?
Where are good locations to scuba dive?
What is a fishing vessel?
In what way did Étienne Halphen interests lead to him discovering the harmonic distribution?
Given a reference text about the Kumanichi Road Race, tell me when the race was first held and who holds the course records.
Give a summary of Manhattan Project
What is a derivative in finance?
What would happen if I ran barefoot? Is it good for me?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Redbeard?
Categorize these as a person, place, or thing
Why USA is best ?
What's the Moroccan infrastructure ?
What advise would you give  on touring India?
What is React?
Given this paragraph, who wrote "August?"
Based on this paragraph, who directed White Rabbit?
What are some reasons you might be late to a party?
Who were the original Fantastic Four in the comics?
What's the most popular tv show of all time in the USA?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what is the prompting paradigm?
When was the last time the Raiders won the Super Bowl?
What is locus (in genomics)?
What is a difference between baseball and cricket?
Where does the Golden Retriever originate from?
Which of the following are cities in the PNW in the US: Seattle, Portland, Hillsboro, Eugene, Tacoma, Vancouver, Surrey, Richmond.
Make a packing list for a picnic at the beach.
Who is Mahatma Gandhi?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Catwoman, Black Cat
describe experience of child fighting with autism
What are the main points in this article
How would you describe Dance?
Why do players smear black under their eyes?
Why Italy is known for
How many hands do humans have?
What is email?
What does BAFTA stands for ?
List some beverages that you can buy at Starbucks.
How fast can an ostrich run?
From the passage below, please extract the official starting date of the United States Space Force.
Based on this paragraph, during what year was Hearst born?
Classify each of the following as either a title by Margaret Atwood or Mary Shelley: The Handmaid's Tale, The Testaments, The Edible Woman, Oryx and Crake, The Year of the Flood, Frankenstein, The Last Man, Lodore, The Mortal Immortal, Maurice
Tell me whether each of these are green or yellow: lemon, lime, cheese, spinach, lettuce, spaghetti
Which of the other locations mentioned in this article is closest to Rudzk Duży?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Chime bar, Pinaka vina
Why is sleep training your baby important?
Who were the Sumerians?
Provide a list of cities you drive through to get from San Diego to Phoenix
Classify these technologies as frontend or backend oriented: React, Kafka, MySQL, JavaScript, gRPC, SQL, Prometheus, Android, Swift, Redis, JDBC
What is the length of a championship rowing race?
What should I get my wife for mother's day?
Hip Hop song Make Me Proud
how to become a yoga instructor?
Come up with short road trips from Berkeley that I can drive to within two hours.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Bassoon, Mandolin
what is the capital of China?
Create a comma separated list of the countries involved in the early cultivation of avocados
What causes Type 2 Diabetes?
Why did Kim Kardashian and Ye divorce?
Can you give me some reasons why Hockey is not as popular in the United States as many other sports?
First you'd need to consider what you're using it for. Exercise bikes can be very different from commuters or casual ride bikes or velodrome racers. Another consideration is budget: bikes can range from a couple hundred dollars in price to several thousand. Accessories can dramatically increase the price as well.

For general, all-purpose bikes you may want to consider a commuter bicycle. It would have a wider, thicker wheel than a road bike so it would be a little sturdier for urban roads. They tend to be a bit heavier, so there is a tradeoff.
what is the difference between a rat and a mouse
How old was Mozart when he first performed?
Kaka means parrot in which language
Who is best Michael Schumacher or Hamilton
What is orange wine?
What is behavioural economics?
What are three capital cities in South America?
Who were the commanders of the two armies involved in the Battle of Hastings?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Daf, Bandura
I want to write a some new articles for my data blog, can you give me some snappy ideas?
How long will it take me to train for a marathon?
What is a good park in Redmond, WA
What is SQL?
Given the following paragraph, where did House music originate?
Where is the "Prairie Chicken Capital of the World"?
What is the biggest dog breed in the world?
Extract from the passage, the first engine in the Jeep Compass
Can you name a few of Leonardo's famous works
What year was Craigslist founded?
List five titles by Margaret Atwood.
What basic tools should I keep around the house?
Given this paragraph about e-readers, what is the e-reader designed and marketed by Amazon?
what is snow skiing
Where is the baseball Hall of Fame?
From the passage provided find how many runs did shane warne concede in the three-day first class match at the Brabourne Stadium
Where are Himayalas located?
What is Violet Jessop well know for?
Based on this passage, what was the first designated space to be established in Roche Percee called? Who established it and in what year?
Give me a bullet list of five different European languages
What is the best way to file California State Tax for Spouse Abroad in community property jurisdiction countries like China? The goal is to minimize the tax for community property income.
Extract comma separated list of the names of the tenants of the Willis Tower from the text.
What is a snowman?
What is Linux?
Who invented the Jeans
What is the best way to answer an interview question?
What is the Bastille Day?
Why is March 14th Pi day?
Can you tell me about Hyderabad, India?
Summarize the given text in several sentences.
Which player has won the most Superbowls?
Where is Michael Phelps from?
The music room contains the following instruments: Drums, Violin, Cello, Gong, Viola, Xylophone, Guitar, Ukelele and Piano. You need to put percussion on the left hand side and strings on the right. First, group the instruments into percussion and strings.
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 top-grossing movies of all times.
Classify the following drinks as alcoholic or non-alcoholic: Bourbon, Whiskey, Vodka, Lemonade, Iced Tea
What is the pattern in this sequence and what is the next number: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13
Tell me which of the following are science fiction TV shows: Lost, The X-Files, The Mandalorian, Millennium, Game of Thrones.
Write a haiku about a naughty cat.
What are the key components to landscaping?
Why does my chicken create so much liquid when cooked in the skillet?
How does manufacturing analytics improve production?
From this reference text, what political party does Taylor Swift belong to?
Who is the greatest tennis player of all time?
Classify each of the following as being opaque or transparent: Window, wall, lens, glass, wood, cement
Given this reference text about Jimmy John's, where was the original Jimmy John's located?
Where did Danny Dayton graduated from?
What should I do if I'm feeling depressed?
Give me a two sentence summary of the following text: "A Venn diagram illustrates the relationships between two or more data sets. Venn diagrams are especially useful for highlighting similarities and differences and are commonly used to compare and contrast the characteristics of different data sets.

In a Venn diagram, circles are used to represent each data set. Inside each circle is a list of characteristics that define that data. Characteristics shared between two or more data sets are listed in the area where the circles overlap. Simple Venn diagrams consist of two overlapping circles, but complex Venn diagrams may compare up to five or more data sets using up to five or more circles.

Venn diagrams are commonly used in business and education settings to visualize and explore how things relate. In a business context, Venn diagrams are commonly used in product development, marketing, management, and more."
What is the 2nd amendment of the US constitution? Is it misunderstood?
What are some benefits of running?
Who was the original lead singer of the band Linkin Park?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Mirwas, Esraj
From the passage provided, extract the name of the first female recipient of Turing award
What is the capital of Kansas?
What are the interesting facts about Shakespeare?
Which of these are capitals of states in USA: Richmond, San Diego, San Francisco, Sacramento, New orleans, New York, Seattle, Carson City, Portland, Jamaica City, Salem, San louis obispo, Trenton, Bellevue, Redmond, Renton, Kirkland
How do you play chess?
List all the years mentioned in the following passage
What is the plot of Jojo's Bizarre Adventures?
Which Super Bowl Halftime Show performer was upstaged by a dancing shark?
Given this paragraph about history of China, what is the name of the river that nurtured China's civilization.
What is sphingosine?
Give me the list of books related with the series 'The Lord of the Rings', in order of publication
What are some menu items I can buy at Taco Bell?
Why zurich is so beautiful
Write a positive Yelp review for a Chinese restaurant called Dim Sum Queen
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Cape Lion, Javan Rhino
Who wrote the TV series Babylon5?
Given a reference text about the Driftwood River, tell me what main river it is part of.
Based on this text, would it be correct to say a peanut is a nut?
Why can't I wake up early in the morning?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Justman?
What are some fun activities to do in Maui, Hawaii?
What are hiccups and why do we get them?
Prince introduced his iconic symbol on the cover of which single?
What is a pronoun?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what is an LLM?
What is blockchain technology?
What is a multiverse?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Shastasaurus, Arctic Fox
How many different Star Trek television series and movies were there in total?
What would the fantasy city look like
What is the best thing about being a manager?
When did Massachusetts become a state?
What type of effect does Coffee have on humans?
What is the oldest film set in ancient Egypt?
Give me some strategies for charity fundraising
Based on this passage, what is the median number of people per family in Zangisheh?
How to tell if someone told a good joke?
What is data warehousing?
From the article, tell me why the trail beneath the Landscape Arch has been closed.
List the seven episode titles from the seventh season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Given these paragraphs about the Tesla bot, what kind of tasks is it expected to perform?
What color do most people perceive the sky to be on a sunny day?
Give me an enumerated list of Four Noble Truths mentioned in Buddhism
What is the color of silicon.
How does Spark relate to Apache Hadoop?
Think up a comma separated list of tropical fruits
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dollu, Tidinet
Given this paragraph about the Southwestern United States, name the largest cities in that area
Tell me what continent are these countries located: China, United States, India, France, Brazil.
What does the acronym MEDDPICC stand for?
When did the Netherlands host the Summer Olympics?
what is the difference between a tale and a tail
Tell me if these are safe or not safe to let me child play with: the monkey bars, matches, scissors, rock paper scissors, a baseball, the stove, a cooking board game
Given this paragraph about the first tour de france, who won the first race
What is the origin of man?
Can you sort the following letters alphabetically: d, h, a, f and y?
Rick was asked, Suppose your mother has four sons, named East, West, and South. What's the fourth son's name?
How did the Getty Museum in Los Angeles respond to the global pandemic?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bianzhong, Sorahi
If you could come back to life as any person, animal or thing, what or who would you be and how would you live your second life?
The below word pairs are all homonyms. Identify which ones are homographs, homophones, or both:

Present/Present
Spring/Spring
Flower/Flour
Classify each of these as team sports, individual sports, or neither: soccer, tennis, swimming, lacrosse, golf, checkers, potatoes.
Come up with a bunch of options for a child's Birthday Party
From the passage identify the spin-off games release in the universe of Clash of Clans. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Give me a list of 5 famous archeological sites to visit in Mexico.
Write a story about a toddler who woke up in the middle of the night after a nightmare about a monster under their bed.
Who is Octavia Butler?
Who has won an NBA regular season MVP?
What is Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs?
Summarize the effectiveness of anaerobic and aerobic exercises on muscle hypertropy.
Why do people love the FIFA world cup?
What is the best city in Ohio?
Write a short story about a person talking about how they are going on an airplane journey for the first time. The story should include an unexpected sad outcome at the end.
What does the Latin phrase mea culpa mean in English?
What are the statistics about San Francisco International Airport?
Who was declared as Person of the Year by  Time Magazine in 2019?
What are the features offered by Github Copilot?
Classify each of the following as a dental or hair product: toothbrush, floss, shampoo, conditioner, gel, floss
Based on this passage, how many siblings did Hearst have?
Who is the best surfer in the world
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Pig, Arabian ostrich
Given these paragraphs about Natural hydrogen, what is another name for it that distinguishes from other forms of hydrogen?
What is a circle?
Summarize the pros and cons of working from home
Tell me whether these objects float or sink in water: oil, leaves, boats, baseball, phone, coins
What does democratizing data mean?
How do you prepare lentil soup?
Summarize disruptive innovation in two paragraphs
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tom-tom drum, Viola de arame
What are some decoration ideas for my apartment for celebrating Easter?
which side of the road you can drive in the UK?
Give me 5 examples of why using a prime lens is better than a zoom lens for photography ?
What was the first credit card
Which Alanis Morissette song contains the phrase "jagged little pill" (the title of her debut album)?
Panchatantra stories were written by
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Banefort?
What is the weather like in Seattle?
What is red tide?
Who is Marika Labancz
How should I learn guitar?
Tell me whether each animal lives in the water or on land: moose, mountain goat, tuna, oyster, parrot
What is the height of the Domtoren in Utrecht.
What is the best hotel in Munnar
Write an email to a friend you haven't seen in a long time telling them about your move to California
Name the last five California governors, including the current one
What is heliocentrism?
What is the minimal set of garden tools to start gardening?
What are the different ways to save money?
What position did Manis Lamond play?
Write me a recursive function for calculating the nth fibonacci number
Classify each of the following as a NFL Team or NBA Team: Chicago Bears, Chicago Bulls, Denver Nuggets, Denver Broncos, Philadelphia 76ers, Philadelphia Eagles, Philadelphia Flyers, Orlando Magic, Tennessee Titans, AND1 Live Streetballers
Count de Grisly was the first to perform what trick in 1799
Do i must to hug my wife
Why did the Prix Lupin not take place from 1915 to 1918?
From the passage provided, extract where Thomas finished high school.
What principles does conversion rate optimization share with direct response marketing?
How many points did Jaromír Jágr score in the 1995-1996 season?
Identify the vegetable: apple, orange, potatoes
Which of the following is a type of fruit: cucumber, broccoli, orange, or apple?
When was the Tesla Model 3 unit one million sold?
Give me a list of the best comedy podcast to listen to
Is Yoga effective in losing weight?
What is a benefit of salsa dancing?
What are the best rock bands that were part of the British invasion?
On what date was the country of Belize granted independence?
Which of the following sports involve rackets: Tennis, Badminton, Squash, Football, Soccer, Basketball, Cricket, Ping Pong.
Given a reference text about Patrick James Mara, tell me what he was known for.
Why sport cricket is so famous?
Given this paragraph, which highs school did Drake Maye attend?
Tell me which of the following are body parts: head, ankle, banana, finger, earlobe, kiwi, toe, car, shoulder, bed
Why would an NHL team want to lose to be last in the standings?
Which of these books were written by James Michener and which were written by Ian McEwan: Tales of the South Pacific, Saturday, Atonement, The Children Act, Hawaii, Texas, On Chesil Beach, and Alaska.
What does "time flies" mean?
What are the pros and cons of denormalizing data sets?
Who is the greatest tennis player of all time?
From a 10-year old child's perspective, write a short summary of a visit to the Rijksmuseum for the Vermeer exhibition.
What are the four major tournaments for the Professional Golfers Association?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Grafton?
Classify these emotions as positive or negative: Love, Joy, Awe, Happiness, Interest, Excitement, Sad, Fear, Distrust, Anxiety, Anger, Disgust, Trust, Apathy, Annoyance, Exuberance, Rage
How old was Pukeiti when he died?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bubon, Kobyz
What can I do to help me sleep better?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Steelpan, Krar
Based on this passage, give a bulleted overview of the components of the lean startup methodology.
Give me some ideas for Halloween costumes.
Tell me whether these numbers are odd or even
List the people who voiced Yogi Bear in the 1980s.
Where did Adlai Stevenson II spend his early life?
Why is it so hard to predict which teams will make the Men's College Basketball Final Four?
Given the following paragraph about politicians, who was the last surviving person to have been a member of the Irish House of Commons?
List the sweet culinary specialities of New Orleans from this provided passage
What is Milky Way?
Extract the age when Brendon Small began to learn how to play Guitar
What is the best time of year to visit Lake Tahoe?
How to introduce a new cat to the household if you already have cats?
Which universe we are living today and how large the universe is?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of the differences between Iyengar Yoga and other yoga practices.
What is the plot of The Count of Monte Cristo?
Who is the most famous left-handed baseball player?
What are the Chinese dialects that people speak in China?
In which city is this high school located?
What is a newspaper?
What caused the millenium tower to sink in san francisco?
Give me some ideas around improving my writing skills
Write a thoughtful letter to my mother-in-law asking her to move out of our house and in to a retirement community.  Make sure to thank her for her help and be kind.  She has lived with us for 5 years and helped us when our kids were little.  We want her to move out in the next 6 months, and we will pay for her retirement home and care.
What is the difference between AWD and 4WD?
List all the Formula 1 teams that Sergio Perez has driven for
List all the organisations mentioned in this paragraph on the history of the Java programming language, as a comma separated list.
Provide a summary of Oliver Cromwell Applegate's career and later years.
Why do toddlers throw tantrums?
What are the applications of game theory in NBA basketball?
What is FrieslandCampina?
From the passage identify the domains in which Hermes is considered a God. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Say that you take 1 step left, then 2 forward, then 4 right, then 3 right, then 3 forward, then 5 back. Take me through the process of determining how far you end up from your starting position.
Who are the Georgia Bulldogs' biggest rival?
What are the three biggest cities by population in Spain?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Moon Knight, Batman
Classify each of the following items as being found in a gym or a bar: Dumbbells, Tequila, Vodka, Barbells, Basketball Court, Beer, Sauna, Locker Room
Give me a list of certain insurances that I should take when moving to Germany.
I am looking into buying a new monitor, how do I know which one I should buy?
How would you book the cheapest rental car in a foreign country?
According to this paragraph, did Frederic Foley hold the patent to the Foley catheter?
What is the highest-grossing film worldwide?
Which is a species of fish? Rock bass or Rock
From the given paragraph, write some points on Church.
Which is a species of fish? Lion or Lionfish
What is Growing Season?
What is a genome-wide association study (GWAS)?
Given this paragraph about time travel, how practical is it
What is the name of the season that begins in the fall and ends in the spring?
Which of the following are fruits: Tomato, Potato, Strawberry, Dragonfruit, Kiwi, Wheat, Corn, Avocado, Poblano, Carrot, Hamburger
With what opera company is the late soprano and master voice teacher Ellen Faull Gordon most associated?
Classify each of the following animals as exoskeleton or endoskeleton: grasshopper, fish, spider, scorpion, ant, monkey
How is plastic made?
What are some easy food recipes that include beef?
What is the route to eternal happiness?
Is "1984" a book or a movie?
what makes the Sun bright ?
What is there to do in Cleveland Ohio?
What does "digital nomads" mean?
Why are plants green?
Who is Evelyn Quan Wang in the move "Everything Everywhere All at Once"?
Given this paragraph, which was built first Disneyland or Disney World?
What number octane gas should be used for combustion engines in vehicles?
Which movie won the Best Picture award at 95th Academy Awards?
What is the best hotel in Sakleshpur
Who is the most sensational player in MLB today?
What is I Liq Chuan?
When do schools close and reopen from summer holidays in India?
When was the Victorian Football League renamed to the Australian Football League?
The Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine is administered to Indian children soon after birth to protect them against which disease?
What is industrial espionage?
From the passage identify the various products and services which are provided by HDFC Bank including the digital products. Display the results in comma separated format.
Given a reference text about Kostas Georgakis, when did he go to Italy and what did he do there?
What is a Roth 401(k)?
Which of the following grapes are used to make white wine: Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc, Riesling, Pinot Gris, Semillon, Gewurztraminer, Viognier, Chenin Blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, 
Merlot, Syrah, Pinot Noir, Zinfandel, Sangiovese, Grenache, Malbec.
Who was the mascot of 13th South Asian Games (SAG)
What are the words of House Buckwell?
Which of the following are models of hoka running shoes? Clifton, ghost, superblast, rincon
Can you suggests some ways to get more organized and complete my tasks without missing any deadlines?
What are the pros and cons of charging your Tesla at home?
Give me a one line summary of this: "Gale gave me a sense of security I’d lacked since my father’s death. His companionship replaced the long solitary hours in the woods. I became a much better hunter when I didn’t have to look over my shoulder constantly, when someone was watching my back…Being out in the woods with Gale…sometimes I was actually happy.”
Name some popular breakfast foods in the United States
Tell me whether these are names of automobile or motorcycle companies: Ford, Triumph, Indian, Harley Davidson, Rolls Royce, Mercedes, Toyota.
what are some tips to start practicing meditation?
What is the best bicycle for me?
Who bred the famous Gone West racehorse?
Given a reference text about Ihor Lapin, tell me what he did before the war.
Write a poem or journal entry about numbers that have special meaning to you.
What is a jet engine?
Extract and list the names of characters a player can control in The Last of Us mentioned in the paragraph. Also describe relationships between those characters.
What are the best types of questions to ask during a job interview?
What is the likelihood of the Cascadia Earthquake ocurring in the next 50 years and how bad will it be?
Where was 52nd International Film Festival of India held ?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Lannister?
Given this paragraph about magnesium, what is the atomic number of magnesium?
Why would anyone go river rafting?
What is the Shy Plant?
Think of all the ways having a diverse group of employees helps an organization.
What is 'karma' according to Buddhism?
Give me a summary about St Paul's Cathedral
Give me a summary of why an abstract is useful in academic literature?
Why should people drink water?
From the passage below, please extract the most recent country to join NATO.
Why are people afraid of sharks?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what are some examples of emergent abilities?
From the passage provided, when was the home version of Pong released?
What is the difference between coffee and espresso?
How do you make wine?
How do archaeologist use stratigraphy?
is diners drive-ins and dives the best food network show?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Babendil, Bowed guitar
From the passage provided, extract the number of Naruto: Shippuden episodes.
If  you found yourself  washed  up on  a  deserted tropical island with no hope for immediate rescue, what  would  you do?
What's the first thing you do when you wake up in the morning ?
What is meant by the saying “break a leg”?
Describe the perfect weekend trip to Boston, Massachusetts.
What is Megan Rapinoe's soccer jersey number?
Does Grigorievna Nazarenko live in Moscow?
Given a reference text about the Falcons, how many Super Bowls have they won in their history?
Extract the key dates and events in the life of Albert Einstein in a bulleted list in the format {date} - {event}
Classify each of the following as names of Pokemon or pop music groups: ABBA, Moltres, Pikachu, Eagles, *NSYNC, TLC, Vaporeon, Snorlax, i5, Dream, Blondie, Charizard, Charmander, Fleetwood Mac
Who was Bhagat Singh?
Who are some important people in U.S. history that everyone should know about?
Please provide 5 different variants of served coffee
Who are the contenders for the World Chess Championship in 2023?
What are the main differences between traditional fishing with a spinning rod or baitcasting rod and fly fishing?
What is the process by which utilities rates are set in the US
What is Sim racing
What is Noether's theorem and how does it relate symmetries to conserved quantities?
Why do people like living in California?
Is Seattle a good place to live at?
What is powerlifting?
In the United States, what type of degree is typically earned before starting graduate school?
From the passage provided about sports articles, extract total number of articles categorized as good and calculate the percentage of good articles
what's the average airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow
What is the difference between Eczema and Atopic Dermatitis?
Why does a US $20 bill have a vertical strip on it when held to light?
Tell me about the Boxer dog
Classify each of the following as either a letter or a number
What is an API?
What is Sensory processing disorder?
What is a weed wacker?
Why is the World Cup the best sporting competition?
what is the indian subcontinent
Which of the following creatures is real or fantasy: Lion, Unicorn, Jellyfish, Hydra, Minotaur, Ox, Centaur, Horse, Kraken
Which ski pass, between IKON pass and Epic pass, should I buy if I live in the Bay area and mostly go to the Lake Tahoe area for skiing.
Categorize each of the following as a golf term or soccer term: slice, nutmeg, goal, stroke, putt, drive, tackle, striker.
When was golf invented?
"repair instead of replace" give five points to support this argument
Write a dialogue between two hikers, John and Jane, who are lost in the woods and can't decide what to do. End the argument with Jane winning and them deciding to turn around and retrace their steps.
What is palmitoylation
What awards did Tendulkar receive based on the above passage? Use the format ‘Award name (year)’ in a comma separated list to present the result.
Classify the series according to the OTT platform they are on.
The Witcher, Jack Ryan, The Rings of Power, Sweet Tooth
Tell me some different ways that you can listen to music
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Rowan?
When did World War II begin?
Which of the following are deciduous trees?

Abies concolor
Acer rubrum
Acer saccharinum
Cornus florida
Gleditsia triacanthos
Picea glauca
picea pungens
Picea abies
Pinus strobus
Quercus rubra
Given a reference text about the Battle of Baghaur, tell me who was in the battle and who won.
The final of Duleep Trophy was held in
Is Gloomhaven on Steam worth buying?
Air Lingus is the national airline of which country
Given a reference text about Janne Mortil, tell me what she is most known for.
Write a letter from the perspective of a potential home buyer to a home owner about wanting to buy the home.
Why is LaSalle Street in Chicago important?
How many keys does a full piano have?
What is the difference between a quartz and a mechanical watch?
Classify each of these as 'useful' vs 'not useful' when applying for college admissions:
GRE scores, SAT scores, dresses, prom dates, admission letter, recommendation letters, interview prep, networking, fees, headphones, number of friends, social media influencer
What is Special Agent Fox Mulder's FBI identification number?
What is quantum mechanics?
Can Penguins fly?
In which European country is this school located?
Why was there a storm in San Francisco last week?
What is Adventures of Tintin?
As per the passage what are the four names of the Vedas?
Tell me about the discovery of coffee bean?
Which of the following famous basketball players have won an NBA championship: Lebron James, Steve Nash, Michael Jordan, Charles Barkley, Dwight Howard, Larry Bird, and Chris Paul
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Gong, Oungum
Given this paragraph about the Grammy Awards, who has the most Grammys of all time?
When was the 68th Division of People's Republic of China deactivated?
Which states make up the Pacific Northwest?
How many World Series have the Detroit Tigers won?
Write a paragraph of a blog post describing the appeal of a weekend stay at Blue Ridge Parkway?
Name some books of the Bible.
Classify each of the following as either round or square shaped: a planet, a a ball, a slice of bread, a chess board.
What's the "Bean" in Chicago?
Given a reference text about a George Orwell, tell me when and where they were born, what books they wrote, and what their most famous accomplishment were.
Where is Sugarloaf mountain located?
Tell me whether these schools are Ivy League or not: Princeton, Vanderbilt, Rice, Stanford, Dartmouth, Brown
Which are the 2 prominent parties in Indian politics
What is Taj Mahal?
Classify each of the following as cylindrical or spherical: Earth, baseball, pipe, tube, soda can, basketball
Give me a summary of the early history of snowboarding
Which spices should every cook have on hand?
What are the best ways to reduce my carbon footprint?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Livyatan, Mountain Gorilla
How do I build my own computer?
Name some characters from the TV show "Friends"?
Provide a bulleted overview of the components of GDP by expenditure
Extract from the text the list of actors and the characters they play.  List answer as bullet list in in format:  {actor name}:  {character name}
How can I ask my aging father-in-law to see the cardiologist when he doesn't want to go?
What is the mission of the Federal Bureau of Investigation?
Is figure skating a hard sport?
What could you do on a Sunday?
What is the meaning of "tidal coupling"?
How many Harry Potter books are there?
What are the words of House Velaryon?
Please give me a short bulleted list of what happened in the 2023 Covenant School shooting incident
What was the Troggs most famous hit
What are the names of four large moons of Jupiter discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1610?
What is tequila?
What is Chichen Itza?
What are artificial neural networks?
Why is an umbrella useful?
Who wrote Ready Player One?
Tell me which of the following are breeds or types of cats: Maine Coon, corgi, golden retriever, Siamese, domestic short hair, Chihuahua, Samoyed, Sphynx, tabby
What is CAP theorem in computer science?
What are the three best commuter trains in California?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Clavinet, Ocarina
Tell me whether these people are chess Grandmasters or professional boxers: Nikolai Krogius, Evgeny Gleizerov, Dmitry Bivol, Nikolai Valuev, and Alexander Alekhine.
What should I expect from modern Data and AI Platform?
List the name of the games in Prince of Persia series along with their publication year. List the results in comma separated format.
What are options for materials to build a house?
List all the school districts in the following paragraph in a bullet list.
Summarize the argument and tell me who won
What are some noteworthy facts from Gabriel García Márquez present on the text?
Given this paragraph about ferrets, do they spend the majority of the time sleeping in a 24 hour day?
Think of seven different protein sources that humans like to eat
Given the referenced text, what Roman Emperor gave Roman Citizenship to all free men?
Why do we have winter and summer clocks?
What is a t-style guitar?
Classify each of these breads as either a dog or a cat bread: Siamese, Ragdoll, Yorkshire Terrier, Birman, Cocker Spaniel, Saint Bernard.
Give me a list of 10 commonly used seasonings in Chinese cooking
Classify each of the following as either a city or a country: venice, rome, venezuela, vatican city, india, brazil, mexico city, mexico, NYC, china, taiwan, london
Which of the following items are for little kids? 
toy, car, airplane, diaper, sippy cup, computer, lighter, onesie, and microwave.
Tell me whether each company is based inside or outside of the USA: Uber, Grab, Samsung, Meituan, Exxon, Amazon, Roche
Who was Beethoven?
What is the plot of Persuasion by Jane Austen?
What new economies developed because of the anti-slave treaties?
Can we transition from oil and Gas ?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what is hallucination?
Given these two sets of instructions, will you end up at the same end point if you started at the same beginning point? First instructions: 1) Take 2 steps forward 2) Turn left 3) Take 3 steps forward 4) Turn left 5) take 2 steps forward. Second instructions: 1) Turn left 2) Take 6 steps forward 3) Take 1 step backward 4) Take 2 steps backward.
Given a reference text about Alberto Michán Halbinger, in what olympics did he compete?
What are the examples of  quantum tunneling processes?
Why do people prefer Dunkin over Starbucks?
Why do people like sweet treats so much?
If you were to compete in the Olympics, which sport would you pick?
Who built the great pyramid of Giza?
What is the meaning of the information age
Based on the below Wikipedia content, what is OLTP?
Using this passage, extract all the years associated with the area.
Given a reference text about Michał Rozenfeld, tell me what he did before the war and where he's buried.
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: RAM, Artega
Besides his expeditions, what was Shackleton's life like?
What is Easter?
What Is the Population of San Francisco and the Bay Area?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the key discoveries from Gallo’s lab.
Give me the list of fortified wines.
Tell me about the history of Data Warehousing. Make it entertaining
Why are some people vegetarian?
What is a way I can trick my mom into thinking I'm sick, so I can skip school today?
Why are the Blasket Islands no longer inhabited?
Given a reference text about a red letter day, provide an explanation of what it means.
What was the main treaty that marked the end of World War I?
Does Davos have a good hockey team
Why are cats so picky about what they eat?
road trip to Kerala from Bangalore.
Who is known as The Invincibles in English football?
What is a chord in guitar music?
What is ice hockey?
What are the best selling albums of all time? Give me the list with the name of the artist and the name of the album
Why is the sky blue?
Name some of the best tourist spots in USA?
How did Jim Henson die?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Atlanta
Come up with the best way to build a sales pipeline
What are startup fundraising rounds?
Which country has won the most world cups in soccer?
Give me a list of the ten best rock guitarists of all time
On a flight, I can only pack three of the following items: sword, book, phone, suitcase, parrot, plane. Which ones should I pack?
Why is Sauna or heat therapy good for you?
What is software craftsmanship
Why should people consider going on holiday in Henley on Thames, UK?
Who is Phil Murphy?
Based on the following paragraph on squat lobster fisheries, where do such fisheries exist today?
How many windows does the building have based on the provided paragraph?
Give me a list of the ten best romance novels of all time
Give me a list of the most popular vehicle brands in the United States.
Given this paragraph about Hydrogen Storage, what is the hydrogen boiling point?
What is the most common spoken language in the world?
Explain inter frame
What was the Ottoman ironclad Hifz-ur Rahman?
What is the difference between fruit and vegetables?
Were masks effective in stopping the spread of Covid 19?
Classify each of the following as either characters from Star Wars or Star Trek: Jean Luc Picard, Grogu, Han Solo, Luke Skywalker, Data, Q, Darth Vader, Ahsoka, William Riker, James Kirk, Spock
Is it better to rebuild or remodel a house?
what are the five pillars of migration or modernization from a legacy data warehouse to a modern lakehouse?
At the concert last night, identify each of these musicians as singer, drummer, guitarist, or bassist: Steve Harris, Bruce Dickinson, George Lynch, Nicko McBrain, Angus Young
Which president was 1st to win a Nobel prize.
What did Jamaican-American author Nicola Yoon major in college for her undergraduate degree?
What movies made Seattle famous in the 1990s?
What are some examples of diseconomies of scale?
What is a benefit of salsa dancing?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Pedal Harp, Baritone Saxophone
Is weightlifting good for you?
Classify each of the following as fast or slow: Toyota Supra, Toyota Corolla, Toyota Highlander
America’s cup comeback
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Opabinia, Dugong
How many planets are there?
How do you maintain good dental hygiene
Did you know the Earth is flat?
Give me a bulleted list of tech billionaires.
What is Falaknuma palace?
What are some common character types in D&D?
Queen Elizabeth II coffin rested on a raised platform called a catafalque at
Tell me about the 1999 UEFA champions league final?
Why is Austin Texas a popular place to live
What is a casual hobby that would be fun to get into?
Which film won multiple Filmfare Awards?
A. Mumbai Meri Jaan
B. Govardhan
C. C.I.D.
D. The end titles are accompanied by the song Aye Dil Hain Mushkil.
What is the difference between its and it's?
Write a story where a princess discovers an abandon cave. The story should have a beginning, middle and end.
Given these paragraphs about the Tesla bot, where and when was it announced?
What is the best way to approach a new cat?
What is comparative genomics?
What are some popular search engines?
Ms. Murmu becomes 2nd woman to hold the post after
What is a typical Dutch tradition when a baby is born?
How often are the Olympics held?
How many movies did director Quentin Tarantino make?
can you recommend fun activities to enjoy in Austin in summer?
Why are Christmas markets so popular in Germany?
What is one of your favorite color?
How to become a good team player?
Which is a species of fish? Opah or Oprah
What should I consider when deciding between electric car or gas car?
What is Visual Basic?
Do tomatoes belong in Louisiana-style gumbo?
Should we get rid of social media?
Are there any eco-friendly alternatives to cremation?
who created the first Teddy bear?
From the passage provided, extract the two forms of energy transfer and list them in bullets.
What are the five boroughs of New York City?
Why do I have blonde hair?
What are several ways to keep a toddler busy?
What are things I can do to help me score better on a test?
How many planets are there in the solar system?
What is magic the gathering?
Does Starlink perform well for working on the road?
Bob's mother had 3 children. Two of them are Mary and Hugh. What is the name of the last child?
From the below text, list the top 3 chapters of the Bhagvad Geeta, with the most verses.
What is better: Tiramisu with chocolate or with Strawberries ?
When did the Vietnam War Start?
What is it like being the last person on earth?
Classify the following ten cloud types by altitude :
Cirrus, Cumulus, Stratus, Stratocumulus, Cumulonimbus, NimboStratus, Cirrocumulus, Cirrostratus, Altostratus, Altocumulus,
Describe a recurring dream you've had.
What is barbecue?
whats needed to make a biryani?

rice
chicken
honey
sugar
oil
pot
towel
barbeque
onions
oven
What are the primary ingredients and spices that go into Greek cooking?
Tell me if these are cities or countries: Spain, Paris, Rome and Germany
What is a DAW?
ways to generate electricity
Given this reference text on the creation of centaurs, where did the mythology originate?
In the provided text multiple examples of a metric are given. Extract the third example of a metric.
What kind of species is the Hackelia bella
In chess, why is the queen valued at nine points instead of eight?
What is the smallest state in the USA?
Tell me whether these people are comedians or athletes: Chris Rock, Kevin Hart, Tom Segura, Joe Rogan, John Rahm, Zach Ertz, Kyler Murray
Given a reference text about Justice League Dark, tell me who the main actors are and what roles they played.
What does Tianwen means?
Who is Prince (musician)?
Give me the list of top 10 movies released in the current millennium, by IMDB rating. Format: Title (Release Date) Rating
Write a short story about a person who discovers a hidden room in their house. The story should include a plot twist and a clear resolution at the end.
What is the most important thing for law enforcement in a kidnapping case?
What are the merits of skipping breakfast? Can you target your answer to a typical American and describe in layman's terms rather than detailed scientific jargon?
Given this paragraph about the planet Jupiter, tell me what it is made of.
Who is William Alfred Bayly?
What is the name of the national museum of the Netherlands?
which are the must visit places in India?
Why do people foster dogs?
What are good gifts for a new mom?
Classify the following shapes as either two dimensional or three dimensional: cube, circle, sphere, triangle, cone, rhombus, square, and pyramid.
What type of brushes are typically used to create an acrylic painting?
Which of the following are writing implements: pen, fine line markers, tiles, morning glories, alcohol markers, mechanical pencils, jugs, sand, ocean salt water, towel
Is it better to visit Yosemite or Venice?
Give me a bulleted list of the top five most followed Instagram profiles.
What is the biggest threat to the great barrier reef?
When was rolling luggage invented?
Where should I travel for a summer vacation in the United States?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Name some famous 1990 music
What is the alphabet?
Why do we use passwords?
I'm a vegan and traveling to new york city next month, can you suggest some vegan restaurants that i can eat at during my trip?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Huiringua, Pipa
Extract the names of the Formula One teams Hamilton was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Here's a list of the key characters in the TV Series Picard who also appeared in another Star Trek franchise series': Jean-Luc Picard, Data, Seven of Nine, Deanna Troi, William Riker, Q, Borg Queen, and Wesley Crusher.

List the characters, sorted by the original series in which they appeared.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Marimba, Hummel
What else can you do with a hammer other than hammering nails?
What types of bikes are there?
Why do people eat food?
Why do people like plants?
Name some of the most popular rides at Disney World's Magic Kingdom theme park.
What is castling in chess?
Who was Amilcare Ponchielli?
What is the best way to improve your tennis skills?
What are the 7 continents in the world
Can you write a brief summary for the book "Braving the Wilderness" by Brene Brown?
Which sub-Saharan colony was the first to gain independence?
Identify the bird from the list: Gadwall, Worm, Centipede
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Shime-daiko, Chilador
Why do you love someone
Is the Vex or FIRST robotics competition a better choice for a child in high school?
Of which generation is Jiang the core leader of China
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Donkey, Leopard ca
Given this paragraph about the dimensions of a volleyball court, what is the area of one half of a volleyball court with an explanation of the math behind the calculation.
Which album Freya Clausen release?
Tell me which continent the following cities are in:
- Seattle
- Helsinki 
- Lagos
- Osaka
- Istanbul
Why do we feel lighter in weight in a swimming pool?
How many more keys does a standard piano have over a harpsichord?
Given this paragraph about planting and harvesting for peanut butter, when are peanuts typically harvested?
how to fight a speeding ticket?
Who was Yogi Bear named after?
Classify the following as either a solid, liquid, or gas: carbon dioxide, water, oil, granite, aluminum, gold, oxygen
How was Netflix able to overcome Blockbuster’s industry dominance in home video rentals?
How did Caesar come to power in Rome?
What are 5 different edible uses for Tomatoes?
Why is CH the Country Code for Switzerland?
What does W stand for in the name W. Rex Black?
What is the plot of Kuroko's Basketball?
Why the Kings will beat the Warriors in the Playoffs
Why is Pickleball sport so popular
Which is a species of fish? Tenpounder or Ninepounder
How long did Air Finland operate?
I need some ideas for a first date.
Is the following statement true or false: cat's have wings?
What was the purpose of Major League Baseball's rule changes this year?
Should the US government pay reparations?
Which animal has the longest known hibernation period
According to the text below, what is a block?
When was Anfield football stadium built?
Please give me a summary of the current rule set for roller derby.
What is New England
What is the tallest structure in the Western Hemisphere?
Tell me about the Walton Football Club
Classify the following nba teams with their respective conference: kings, clippers, bucks, hawks, celtics
Who was Andrew Weatherall
Given this paragraph about the description of wakesurfing, what is needed to generate the wave?
Classify these alcoholic beverages as bourbon, wine, or beer: Budweiser, Blanton's, Devil's Backbone, Chardonnay, Pinot Noir, Yellowstone, Elijah Craig, Pinot Grigio, Yeungling, Sauvignon Blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Samuel Adams, Sierra Nevada, Baker's, Basil Hayden, Eagle Rare, Merlot, Jim Beam, Coors Light, Jack Daniels, Heineken, Miller Lite
Based on the above passage name the regions which were a part of Fatimid Caliphate apart from Egypt, at its height. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Provide a list of benefits of flying first class.
What's the best way to study for a test?
What is arithmetic
Classify each of the following as either a city, or a state/province, or neither: San Jose, Shanghai, Jiangsu, Texas, Japan, Shandong
What high school did Tyrone Brazelton go to?
When building a piece of furniture, categorize each of the following as either "useful" or "not useful": Hammer, Asphalt, Gym, Wood, Nails, Tequila, Measuring Tape, Burrito
Whale skin is how many cm deep?
What makes Southwest Virginia special?
How early should you arrive at the airport before a flight?
What are the three main nutrient groups?
Why is pickleball popular?
What is Tianwen 1?
What are 5 popular reality TV shows?
Give me a list of the 10 most important soccer teams in Brazil.
Name the place in New Zealand, where a volcano erupted?
Q: What is the risk of using a hand sanitizer that contains methanol (wood alcohol) or 1-propanol?
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Ferrari, GMC
What happened to Ned Stark's ancestral family greatsword, Ice?
How much renewable energy is produced and consumed in the United States?
Which classical musician went deaf in the prime of their career?
Who ordered John the Baptists execution
What is difference between ECS and EC2?
Write a description detailing why Soccer is better than Basketball.
What is accepted to be California's first official wine-producing vineyard?
Classify which teams are in the NHL or NBA: Detroit Red Wings, Detroit Pistons, Milwaukee Bucks, Cleveland Cavaliers, Columbus Blue Jackets, Chicago Bulls, Chicago Blackhawks
What is the FAANG equivalent in China?
Given a reference text about Giovanni Dominici, when was he beatified?
What woodwind instruments are popular to learn?
Can whales and dolphins breathe underwater?
How do you determine the severity of vulnerabilities.
Who proposed the Gini coefficient as a measure of inequality of income or wealth?
How long did dinosaurs rule earth?
What is beta oxidation?
I want to sketch with graphite pencils but am confused about the range of options. What do the pencil grades mean and how can they be used?
Given the reference text, where would I be able to find The Oath of Leo III?
Why does the divide and average method for computing square roots work?
Which is a bird or fish: Black guillemot, Black bass
Which of these are religions and which are countries: Christianity, Judaism, Norway, Canada, Islam, Egypt, China, and Iran.
My trophy does not fit my suitcase because it is to small.  I need to travel.  What could I do?
Did David Benioff direct any episodes in season three of Game of Thrones?
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
Who is Sean Connery?
What are the key features introduced by Apple in their iPhone since its creation which makes it so popular and innovative?
who won the last soccer world cup ?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ranat ek, Sasando
why do human beings have a tendency to think they are always right?
Which of the following are dog breeds? Magyar Vizsla, German Shepherd, Abyssinian, Doberman, Scottish Fold
Given this short paragraph about the life of George K. McGunnegle, how old was he when he retired and what month of the year did that happen?
How do you care for a dog?
why do you like India
Who was the most popular musical artist in the 1980s?
per this description of the game of fooseball, how many full rotations are allowed in the game at the championship level?
What are three things I can do to be better at tennis?
Based on the text how does someone win in Texas Hold 'em?
What are the words of House Tallhart?
What is random access memory?
Make me a list of the first four Americans who landed on the moon.
What colors would you use for a futuristic logo?
At a restaurant that serves only vegan food, tell me whether each of the following items could be found in the kitchen or not: Butter, Eggs, Tofu, Chicken, Kale, Spinach, Peppers, Steak, Bread, Chickpeas, Pork
How long did the Mughal empire last in India?
Tell me which of these are shades of Blue that BWM paints their cars: Miami Blue, Laguna Seca Blue, Le Mans Blue, Interlagos Blue, Heritage Blue, Mexico Blue, Yas Marina Blue, Gulf Blue, Long Beach Blue.
Write a short, polite but forceful letter to the City of Toronto requesting they waive their assessed penalty for late submission of the annual home vacancy declaration, which was impossible to file due to an overwhelmed web portal and incorrect backend data for my home.
What is Mr. Burn's assistant name on the Simpsons?
Classify each of the following as healthy or unhealthy: cake, apple, broccoli, donut, candy, soda, kombucha, and ice cream
Who is the company Swiss Re
Explain the Fibonacci sequence
What does LBH mean?
What video game console can you play ATV Offroad Fury 3 on?
What is a stock?
How do you install tubeless tires on a bicycle?
What famous Italian plumber brothers were featured in the Nintendo Entertainment System?
Suggest some brass instruments I can learn if I want to play in an orchestra?
Please list the Peace Nobel Prize award winners according to the text
Tell me the country of these cities: Tokyo, London, New York, Taipei
What triggers urticaria at night and why are hives and itching at their worst?
The LIVA Miss Diva Supranational 2021 was given to whom?
What are all the locations that walnut trees grow, listed in this article.
What is an exacta?
Give me a list of 10 airlines from around the world.
Based on the reference text about the Tampa Bay Rays, what is the name of their stadium and who are their main rivals?
What are the benefits of working out?
what is the greenest country ion the world
Give me a bulleted list of the five most recent Italian prime ministers.
Who did Stafford throw touchdown passes to in Super Bowl LV?
Tell me whether these are cheeses or not: Stinking Bishop, Gouda, Gonzo, Brie, Partisano
what is rain ?
What might make a good villain for a fantasy role playing game adventure.
What does the percentage chance of rain in a weather forecast indicate?
Name five countries in South America.
I have a list of Herbs and Spices. Please divide this list into those categories: basil, bay leaf, chives, cardamon, cinnamon, fennel, cloves, lemon grass, nutmeg, pepper, oregano, turmeric, parsley, ginger, saffron, vanilla rosemary, cumin, sage, and thyme.
what is yellow long fruit?
Which parts of New York City are best to live in?
Why is customer obsession important
What math classes are offered at high schools in the United States?
What's the best for indoor plant?
Of NFL teams who have gone to the Super Bowl, how many have a win percentage of Super Bowls of at least 50%?
Why you should sleep at least 7 hours
From the passage provided, extract the types of castles in Greater Manchester and the corresponding number of each type in a numbered list of format {Type} - {Number}
From the passage provided, extract the what were some of the key years and discoveries of portuguese maritime exploration?
What did Stevie Ray Vaughan name his most beloved guitar?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Doctor Strange, Dr. Fate
Which movies star Eddie Murphy and which ones star Bill Murray: Groundhog Day, Coming to America, Rushmore, Lost in Translation, Beverly Hills Cop, Caddyshack, 48 Hours, and Trading Places.
When did Alaska become a state?
What are five popular songs by the Grateful Dead?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Dodge, Volkswagen
In your mind, what is most concerning about the state of American politics today?
What is accounting?
Assume you are the head boy/ girl of your school, draft a notice of around 50 words inviting students of classes 11 and 12 to attend a career counselling session by ABC, including how it will help the students.
Why do cats make purring sounds?
Which of the following technology categorized as Infrastructure as code (IAC) or CICD tool? Terraform, AWS Cloud Formation , Github actions, Azure Devops pipeline
What country has the most active valcanoes in the world?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Massey?
Classify these as healthy or not healthy food options or not a food: french fries, KFC, apple, fruit salad, steak, beer, wine, whisky, potato chips, baked cauliflower, wrench, gravel, McDonald's, Turkish kebab, pear, bricks, aloe vera, sand.
is engineering a great career
What is a economic trait of Generation Z (Gen Z)?
According to this passage, what percent of the lithography machine market do Ultratech, Canon and Nikon, MKS Instruments, Lam Research and Cadence Design Systems have in aggregate?
Classify each of the following as either a virtue or a vice: humility, kindness, patience, greed, anger, lust, envy, pride.
Could you plan a canoe camping trip in Michigan? I want to canoe the river from start to end, and need specific camping locations for each night.
What is Twitch Interactive?
After the song "Holding Out for a Hero" appeared in Footloose, what album did it appear in?
When is the best time to see cherry blossom in Japan?
Is Python a popular programming language?
What is the most popular sport?
Who is the successor of Queen Elizabeth II ?
Can foreign nationals get an Aadhaar in India?
What are some types of things you can cook at a campfire?
How cloudy is Seattle USA
Who is the greatest tennis player of all time?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Trunk, Tree, Fruit, Leaf, Flower
Tell me whether these are fiction or non fiction books: "To Kill a Mocking Bird", "The Lord of the Rings", "A Brief History of Time".
What are some of the best business podcast to listen to?
What are some achievements of the 137th Division
What is a Put option in finance?
What should I think about when buying a car (summarization)
What is Ralph Baer famous for?
Which of these are languages in India and which are not Indian Languages: English, Hindi, Ukranian, French, Spanish, Hindi, Kannada, Tulu, Mandrian, Tamil, Taiwanese, Korean, Japanese, Assamese, Sanskrit, Urdu, Telugu, Russian, German, Italian, Arabic, Dutch, Welsh, Gujrati, Somali, Pahari, punjabi
What are Newton’s laws of motion?
What is exchange rate?
What is a Penalty in Football?
Which months of the year does the Northwest Pacific see tropical cyclones?
Classify each of the following exercises as cardio or weights: bench press, running, cycling, squat, jump roping, curl
what is the most important thing large language models can do?
Give me five books that I should read today.
Tell me whether each of these things smells good or bad: candle, pig, skunk, poop, febreze, incense
how many teams relegate from the English premier league?
What re the differences between recruiters and sourcers at a company?
Who is the greatest basketball player of all time?
Where is the Hawkeye Creek Bridge located
When rollerblading which of the following items will protect you from injury and which will not: Helmet, a baseball cap, sunglasses, knee pads, backpack, headphones, and elbow pads?
From the following article, tell me the information related to the most recent year and what the largest number in the article is referring to.
Give me a bulleted list of the best chain coffee shops in the United States
Given this paragraph about Thanjavur paintings and its origins, what are the typical features of Thanjavur paintings?
What are some former names for the city of Mumbai?
Please provided me some context in form of bullet points on Open Doors organisation
How is the weather in India?
What color is Perpetual Spinach?
What are some of the best things to do in Fort Collins, Colorado?
Who are the main characters on the TV show "Bluey?"
Why we have to work?
you are riding your bicycle to the store and your bicycle has a basket. which of the following items can you take back home? a toothbrush, a TV, a bar of soap, a pair of pants, a pair of skis, a loaf of bread, a tiger, a phone charger
tell me whether these are girl names or boy names: Ali, Billie, Cameron
What is the best place to go downhill mountain biking
What were the Crusades?
Which is bigger, a lion or a house cat?
Who is the St Louis Cardinals?
Tell me which one does not fit with the group:  Blue, Green, White, Yellow
What does moha mean
What is the highest mountain peak in Kosovo?
What are some good costumes I can wear for Halloween? Give me at least five in a bullet list
Is it safe for dogs to eat chocolate?
How to have an evergreen garden?
Who were the Beatles?
How many teams are in the MLB National League
Where should you go on vacation?
What is pisco?
How Many Players are there in a Football Team?
Why should you use multi factor authentication to secure your computer accounts?
What is the Eupithecia spinibarbata
What do you know about Apache Spark?
Name some of the famous battles from the American Revolutionary War
What is the name of the wine that can only be named for its specific growing location in France?
Given a reference text about Teodoro "Teddy" de Villa Diaz, tell me how he died and how old he was when he died.
What is one of Poseidon's many powers?
Give me a list of actors who won an Oscar in the last 5 years.
When did the fist episode of Family Guy air?
What does the term 'Thala' mean?
What is a tornado?
What is Java?
What are the top 5 soccer(football) leagues in the world?
Where is the band Portugal. The Man originally from?
Which of the following does not fit with the others? Please explain your reasoning.
Galaxy M81
Black Eye Galaxy
Pinwheel Galaxy
Andromeda Galaxy
Sombrero Galaxy
what is considered the birthplace of mountain biking?
Given this paragraph, where is The Walt Disney Company headquarters?
Write a tweet from the perspective of a dog that’s angry about the squirrels in its yard
What are the number of provinces in Belgium?
What are some must-see places in Romania?
What are five fun ideas for a first date?
Given a reference text about Sam McElroy, at what school was he the head football coach and what was his overall record there?
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Land Rover, Jeep
Who is Lilith?
What is the length of the song "The New Deal"?
What are some advantages of making a painting with acrylic instead of oil paint?
How many times Fernando Alonso won the F1 championship ?
Why is it good to fly direct?
List down some key points about area in geometry from the passage given.
Classify each of the following as either a brass instrument or a woodwind instrument: flute, euphonium, bassoon, trumpet, clarinet, saxophone, tuba.
what can you do
Where is Tamil language spoken?
Extract all the place names from the paragraph. Different places should be separated by comma.
Extract ways to observe a black hole. Separate them with a "-" in multiple lines.
What activities are popular among tourists visiting the Texas barrier islands?
Give me a list of the top 5 Colleen Hoover books
Extract the ways the asthma is classified and create a bulleted list.
Are the these examples of deserts or desserts? Cake, pie, cookies, and ice cream.
How long has the Masters golf tournament been held?
What are the four largest British Virgin Islands?
Based on the text below, how would you explain Archimedes’ principle to a 10 years old child, using the example of an object immersed in water?
List the 6 naturally occurring noble gases.
Given a reference text about N.V. Virgin Express S.A., tell me its main hub and when it was founded.
What are the top 5 most expensive luxury brands?
What are the main reasons Parisians want electric scooters to be banned according to the following article?
 
Parisians are voting on Sunday on whether to rid the streets of the French capital of electric scooters, although some say the city’s leaders ought to be focusing on more pressing issues.

Paris was a pioneer when it introduced e-scooters, or trottinettes, in 2018 as the city’s authorities sought to promote non-polluting forms of urban transport.

But as the two-wheeled vehicles grew in popularity, especially among young people, so did the number of accidents: in 2022, three people died and 459 were injured in e-scooter accidents in Paris.

In what is being billed as a “public consultation” voters are being asked: “For or against self-service scooters?”

Twenty-one polling stations have been set up across the city and will be open until 7pm local time, with the result expected at around 10pm.

Electric scooters available for rent on the Place du Trocadero, Paris.
E-scooters: a tale of two cities as London and Paris plot different paths
Read more
Although 1.6 million people are eligible to vote, turnout is expected to be low.

Paris’s socialist mayor, Anne Hidalgo, has promoted cycling and bike-sharing but supports a ban on e-scooters.

In an interview with Agence France-Presses last week, Hidalgo said “self-service scooters are the source of tension and worry” for Parisians and that a ban would “reduce nuisance” in public spaces. However, she promised to respect the outcome of the vote even if it is not legally binding.

Paris has almost 15,000 e-scooters across its streets, operated by companies including Lime, Dott and Tier.

Detractors argue that e-scooter users disrespect the rules of the road and regularly flout a ban on riding on pavements. The vehicles are also often haphazardly parked or thrown into the River Seine.

In June 2021, a 31-year-old Italian woman was killed after being hit by an e-scooter with two passengers onboard while walking along the Seine.

“Scooters have become my biggest enemy. I’m scared of them,” Suzon Lambert, a 50-year-old teacher from Paris, told AFP. “Paris has become a sort of anarchy. There’s no space any more for pedestrians.”

Another Parisian told BFMTV: “It’s dangerous, and people use them badly. I’m fed up.”

Julian Sezgin, aged 15, said he often saw groups of two or three teenagers on e-scooters zooming past cars on busy roads. “I avoid going on e-scooters and prefer e-bikes as, in my opinion, they are safer and more efficient,” he told the Guardian.
What is the Tesla Model Y Charging Speed?
What colour usually is the wax surrounding Edam cheese?
From the passage provided, extract the difference in caffeine between a light roast and a dark roast.
Given this paragraph about the experiment that led to the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming, tell me upon which types of bacteria penicillin has an anti-bacterial effect, and list the conditions that were necessary for the discovery of penicillin
What is the difference between affect and effect?
Which were the top 3 nations in the medal tally of World Wrestling Championship 2022
When buying a used car, what are some red flags to look out for?
Ms. Jefferson, a 47-year-old secretary, has contacted you to assess her body composition. Over the years, she has gradually gained weight because of her sedentary lifestyle and changing metabolism. Besides adopting healthy dietary and exercise habits, how can she build self-esteem and improve her body image?
Given this paragraph about the grand Ethiopian renaissance dam, what is the expected power generation on the latest design.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Erxian, Alfaia
Give me a list of classic English poems with nice message
Is there a fast way to put a duvet cover over a duvet?
Please provide a list of Michael Jordan's accomplishments in the 1987-1988 NBA basketball season.
How much nutritional value do dried fruits retain?
Who is Gillian Anderson?
What are five hobbies I can do in my spare time?
Are rugby and American football similar?
Give me some examples of spoonerisms.
What is the boarding process at Southwest Airlines
Of the following, identify which are TV shows that originally aired in black-and-white, brands of toothpaste, and places where you can participate in water sports: the beach, The Honeymooners, I Love Lucy, Colgate, Florida, a river, The Munsters, Crest, Aquafresh, a lake, a pool, Rembrandt, The Addams Family
What are some things that we can do to help the environment?
When in the year 44 BC was Julius Caesar killed?
How much of the land of Swiftwater community is forested land and how much of it is wetland?
Choose the word which is different from the rest: Emu, Ostrich, Kiwi, Eagle
Should I use a dynamic microphone or a condenser microphone for recording a podcast? What about streaming on twitch or making youtube videos? Should I ever use a ribbon microphone?
What is a bank run?
What are the three main states of matter and how does it transition between them?
When was Mar-a-Lago built?
What is "Breaking Bad"?
Who did the USA beat in Women's World Cup final in 2019?
What are the key components of Hadoop?
Which USA government agency is responsible for preventing diseases?
What is the lowest point on Earth?
What do the Olympic rings mean?
How did Legos get their name?
How many types of bass are there?
Classify each of the following bands as Classic Rock , or not: Led Zeppelin, Jimi Hendrix, Journey, Rolling Stones, Miley Cyrus, Taylor Swift, Aerosmith
Do I need diverter to charge my car using excess generated power from solar panels?
What types of Barbecue (BBQ) are there?
Classify these cities into the countries that they are in.
Paris, Munich, Frankfurt, Nice, Lyon, Dresden
Given this paragraph, how big are the non-volley zones in pickleball and where are they located?
What is s3 equivalent in Azure?
Who is best Alexa or Siri
Who won the 2022 NBA Finals MVP?
Create a 5 day itinerary for a trip to Japan. Include visits to famous locations in Japan, and include a day-by-day breakdown of some activities to do and sites to visit.
What are three common alarm clock sounds?
What is a stock in finance?
Maurice Micklewhite became famous as who
Complete the joke 'A Large Language Model enters a bar'
Give me a list of some preparations in which stracchino cheese is used/
Is a jaguar a big cat or a small cat?
Where is Lugașu de Jos
Name three different bug type Pokemon.
Which dragon in Game of Thrones was reanimated as a wight?
What does RAND Corporation do?
What is process manufacturing?
Where is Smuggler Cove Shell Midden located?
Who was the first couple to win the Nobel prize?
Give me a list of 7 continents in the world in alphabetical order.
Why is it so hard now to name a favorite musician?
Which is a species of fish? Pickerel or Pickle
What are some good activities to keep kids busy while traveling?
Who are Daenerys Targaryen's dragons named after?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Eryops, Bluefin Tuna
What is the best party to vote for in the US?
Provide for me, in a bulleted list, seven sports that have been removed from the Olympics
Please tell me a little bit about the personal lives of the best hockey players at this time.
How many players participate in an ultimate frisbee game?
Classify each of the following as either a fruit or a vegetables: tomato, apple, orange, potato, banana.
Given a reference text about S26, tell me where it begins and ends.
Given this information about the players championship tournament, what were the weather conditions on March 20th 1977?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of what a restricted Boltzmann machine is?
Tell me whether these are different types of galaxies or different types of ecosystems: Forest, Grassland, Irregular, Spiral, Aquatic, Desert, Elliptical, Tundra, Marine
Extract the different foods a giant panda eats from this passage in wild and captive. Place them in two separate bulleted lists with heading as 'Wild' and 'Captive'
What are some arguments for decriminalizing people selling sex while criminalizing the purchasing of sex?
What are the words of House Lannister?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Canary, Green pheasants
How did India get independence from colonial rule
Classify each of the following as a weapon or a toy: gun, lego, knife, bomb, blocks, doll
Why is music so special?
What are the five biggest centers of Sufism?
What is does ELT stand for?
What is the difference between a dialect and an accent?
What’s your favorite way to spend a day off?
Who is the best ever President of the United States ?
Why do people hate pineapple on pizza?
What was Meghan Markle's royal title?
What singer was born Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou?
What is the Firefly Music Festival?
What is a prime number?
Name some of Sweden's most famous companies
Name some plays that were written by Shakespeare
What are four reasons why you have a car on your front lawn?
Give me a bulleted list of the current members of Pearl Jam.
According to this paragraph, what records did Stevens break as a basketball coach?
If you were to weigh each one of these items on average, what would be considered heavy and light if you were to carry them: boulder, pebble, feather, bowling ball, elephant, seed, sand, dirt, water, books, papers, backpack
What would you do to improve the rules of Tennis, to make it a better TV viewing experience?
given the following text, tell me the most popular method for training multi-layer perceptrons today and explain how it works
What is a popular mystery book series?
Please describe a fantasy animal
What is a useful set of criteria to use when determining who has a lot of leadership potential in my team?
What does Chevron do?
What is Black rice?
Where is Pleasanton?
Who is the company ABB
What is the best way to make Indian ginger tea?
Given a reference text about the Kwahu Plateau, tell me its average and highest elevations.
Classify each of the following as having 2 wheels, 4 wheels, or neither: Car, Tricycle, Bicycle, Motorcycle, Grocery Cart
What are all the ways I can get around in San Francisco?
Why might someone choose to move to Seattle?
Who were the Grateful Dead?
What is the difference between an alligator and a crocodile?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Ray Palmer, Ant-Man
Why do we still use vacuum tubes in modern electric guitar amplifier?
Given this reference about the Battle of Okinawa during WW2, what was the difference in between the US (77th Infantry Division) and the Japanese casualties and wounded?
Who is JFK?
What is the oldest manufacturer of cymbals?
What happened on January 6, 2021?
What are the colors of the rainbow?
Which African country was founded by Americans
Summarize what electoral college does in USA presidential election
What is the significance of Thanks Giving.
When is the world diabetes day celebrated?
Identify the hemisphere (Western or Eastern) where each of these countries is located: Namibia, United States, Canada, Australia, China, Brazil, Egypt, Mexico, Lebanon
From the text provided, find all the names of game consoles. Separate them with a comma.
Why is Peter Pan usually portrayed by a female on stage performances (not movies)?
What specie is the Anachemmis sober?
Given the reference text about Bodo Tümmler, who was he?
Classify the following as TV Shows or movies: Ted Lasso, Schitt's Creek, The Office, Seinfeld, The Elephant Whisperers, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, Delhi Crime, The Social Network.
Tell me if the following activities are healthy or harmful: sleeping, running, eating fruit, smoking, listening to music, drinking alcohol, occasional cocaine usage, hiking by yourself in the desert with no water, eating McDonald’s
What are some good Indian dishes?
What kind of cars are good for families with 3 small children?
Where can I mine diamonds in the United States?
How to stay calm in stressful situations ?
Why is prioritizing diversity hiring in an organization important?
How was art used for manipulative purpose in racial discuss in the 20th century?
Give me an idea for repurposing my empty egg carton and instructions on how to do it.
Who starred in Godfather Part II
Extract the special guests that Taylor Swift had on her 1989 Tour in 2015. Separate them with a comma.
Name the top 10 Sci Fi books of all time?
Why do people like to run very long distances like marathons?
What is the tallest building in the San Francisco Bay Area?
What enabled Libya to obtain rapid economic growth prior to 1990?
Summarize the four basic principles of GAAP accounting
Give me a list of the top US mobile service providers
Bioinformatics
Why do kids like to play video games so much these days?
From the passage provided, extract the name of the 37th speaker of the House of Commons  of Canada
Write a paragraph highlighting the rise of cyber crime, and the vulnerability of people  who are unaware of the risks (or careless), and end the note with a single line on suggested steps.
Name four Ivy League schools.
Why do Germans love their cars?
When will George R.R. Martin release the sixth book in the series "A Song of Ice and Fire"?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kecer, Saz
What is the "iron curtain"?
Name three different cuts of steak from a cow.
Please give me summary of the below graph in not more than 2 line.
To which species does Allium desertorum belong
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Longwaters?
What is an audible?
Who are the top NFL Quarterbacks?
Who was the prime minister of Spain when Spain joined NATO?
What's the oldest capital in the world?
Who is the company Roche
Who is Rentala Madhubala
Where did David Leatherbarrow receive his PhD from?
Is Horsfieldia nervos a plant or animal?
Who was Severus Snape secretly in love with?
Who is Romulo Gallegos?
What is the biggest fish in the ocean?
What does someone mean when they say “flip him the bird”?
Who is Oji Hiroi
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of a broken mind.
Why is Manchester United the best football team in England?
Who was the 45th President of the United States of America?
What is the most played popular and most played instrument in the world?
Is Divine Child High School a private or public school?
Haven't you always believed that Earth is flat?
What is Crohn's Disease and what are some of the symptoms?
What is the Zhou Dynasty?
Tell me about plant life cycle
What is the difference between electric guitar and acoustic guitar?
Extract the listed ingredients involved in the making of Sourdough bread, in a comma separated list
Name some of the best Taylor Swift songs
What are all the different evolutions for Eevee in Pokemon GO?
Why is "The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog" used so often to show fonts?
What are three ways to camp.
Provide a list of signs that you have won at life
What are the words of House Mooton?
What kind of activity do good sales people do?
What is the minimum weight of a coswain?
Who is the best all-time soccer player?
What was Elvis Presley's first No. 1 hit in the United States?
List some of the minor houses in the series "A Song of Ice and Fire."
Based on the above passage name some of the companies which specialize in large-scale construction of the infrastructure to support oil field exploitation. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Which team was relegated from the league at the conclusion of the 1991 Season?
Which is the best soccer team of all time?
Which of the following countries do not follow the rectangular-shaped flag standard that most every other country does: Nepal, South Africa, Japan, South Korea, Vatican City, Switzerland, Vietnam, Australia
I am thinking of going to yoga. What type of class is good for me?
What is the best skill in judo?
What is called a Capital charge in finance?
Extract the most recent owner of the Seattle Storm from this Wikipedia article.
Give me a bulleted list of the past 10 Masters Tournament Champions.
What is COBOL used for?
Who amongst these are cricketers: Virat Kohli, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, 
Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams, Andre Agassi, Sachin Tendulkar, Ricky Ponting, Anil Kumble, Harmanpreet Kaur, Mithali Raj, Sarah Taylor.
What are the chess pieces that a player starts out with?
How to evict a tenant in California
From this passage, what is the main benefit of TCP?
Is black hole truly black?
Why do people need sleep?
What are some quick dinners that I can make during the week?
How many continents are in the world?
Who is the St Louis Cardinals?
How can I get people to like me?
Tell me whether these are found at the beach or on a mountains: ocean, ski resort, chair lift, shell, seaweed, hiking trail
write a story about the first contact of Alien would be
Why do sailboats have to tack upwind?
I need a bulleted list of a few things people like to do with trees.
Write a friendly complaint to an airline service about a poor experience with multiple issues and ask for points.
Given a reference text about George Watson Buck, tell me where he went to Quaker School and where he got a job in 1807.
Was Michael Flavin wealthy at the time he wrote Benjamin Disraeli?
Where is the annual indoor rowing World Championship?
How did Andy Warhol create the "piss paintings"?
Extract a list of poems and the year they were published in the following form: {Poem name}: {Year published}

And sort the list chronologically
What is the purpose of operating a motor vehicle?
Who was Raghib Pasha?
Extract the year that the Balloon typeface was created from the following Wikipedia article.
How many people died in the Cloquet fire of Illinois according to the text?
Given this paragraph, who was the first person to run the Western States 100 in under 24 hours?
What is a wallet used for?
Why are kids inquisitive?
Which of these four novels has the least in common with the others?

1. Red Harvest by Dashiell Hammett
2. One Hundred Years of Solitude by Gabriel Garcia Marquez
3. The Big Sleep by Raymond Chandler
4. The Hound of the Baskervilles by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
What are some good steps to getting an AWS cloud certification and getting a cloud job?
Based on the following passage where did plums, apricots and peaches originate?
Given a refrence text about The Bobcaygeon Independent, tell me when it was established and when it ceased publication.
When did the golden age for Jewish culture start and where was it?
Monster Hunter 4 Unlimited (hereafter, "MH4U") was a video game released exclusively for the Nintendo 3DS circa 2013. Elden Ring was a video game released for multiple platforms in circa 2022 to critical acclaim. 

If MH4U and Elden Ring were considered to be siblings nine years apart in a small family, how might the experiences of MH4U have influenced the growth and development of Elden Ring?
What is the Krusty Krab?
What are the top 10 largest cities in the world by population (city proper)?
Classify each of these bands as Polish death metal, Norwegian death metal, or K-Pop: BTS, EXO, Red Velvet, Cadaver, Darkthrone, Behemoth, Vader, Empatic, Girls' Generation, TWICE, Blood Red Throne, Emperor, Gorgoroth, Decapitated
Why should I cheer for the Sacramento Kings in this year's NBA playoffs?
From the given text, provide a couple of points on Supreme Court of Iran
How does the time of sunrise vary from spring to summer?
How does grain orientation effect the dimensional movement of wood?
What is the best sport?
Was the hermit hummingbird hawkmoth first described in the 18th century or the 19th century?
What sport did Troy Stradford play in college?
Based on the passage provided, what does Brene Brown's research focus on?
Given this paragraph, show me how to calculate how many total patrons can be served by all of the Schauspielhaus theaters?
Do you ever sing when you're alone?
What is an idea?
Why are kids inquisitive?
When and where was the field of AI officially born?
Extract the names of the stage shows Dixie Violet Egerickx starred in and the role she played in them. List them using bullets in the format {Stage} - {Role}
What is Fascism and what is the historical context?
Heres a summary of Gioia Del Colle, a town in Italy that I will be traveling to, how should I pack?
List the competitions that Charlier competed in and where he placed in the format [Competiton]: [Place], [Age]
What are some common items on a charcuterie board?
What are the basic rules of baseball?
What are common ways to invest money?
What is seek speed in HDFS and why is it no longer going to be important?
What are the most popular dishes to bring to a potluck?
What is a generic question?
How many provinces are in Canada?
Where does AAP operate?
Tell me which one does not fit with the group:  Cigar, Cigarette, Tobacco, Pipe, Hookah
What are some different ways to entertain my family when they visit Boston?
Who is John Adams?
Categorize the below types of organisms.
bacteriophages, coccus, bacillus, spiral, coryneform, filamentous
What are a few things to do when visiting Northern Vietnam?
What is SMTP?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bougarabou, Haegeum
What material is typically used for rowing shells?
which are the countries surrounding India
Classify each of the following as cold or hot: sun, snow, oven, fridge, freezer, fire, stove, ice cream
What is the origins of mens lacrosse?
Classify each of the following as bright or dark: sun, lamp, cave, light, night, tunnel
Which of the following are flowers: roses, peonies, worms, carnations, tulips, dirt, lavender, and sunflowers?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Catalan shawm, Tres
Is there a Romanian Royal Family?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Cave Lion, Sumatran Elephant
What essential tools do I need in my toolbox?
Give me a bulleted list of the main responses to "Bad Blood" listed in this text, including whether they were positive or negative.
Which of the following are names of flowers: daffodil, rose, quinoa, lily, daisy, elm, pyrite, violet, jade, leather, polycarbonate, jasmine
What Is a Request for Proposal (RFP)?
Who is Linkin Park
In literature who is the alter ego of Percy Blakney
Which of these is an electronic device? Ipad, TV, Rock, Laptop, Tree.
What country has the most all time medals at the Winter Olympics?
What are some things that would cause the velocity of money within an economy to increase?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of what skateboarding is.
Which is better for you, red or green grapes?
What was special about the 2021 Formula 1 World Championship?
What is the difference between snowboard and ski boots?
What are steps to become a US citizen?
Based on the following passage describe the first solid-state device and its use.
What is the distance between the bases in professional baseball?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Jason Todd, Winter Soldier
What is kombucha made of?
Group these font types based on their style of typefaces: Times New Roman, Monaco, Garamond, Helvetica, Courier,  Futura
What is a piano?
Pancakes or waffles?
How many versions of One Night game available?
What are some ways you can stop your toddler from crying?
What is the name of the dog that looks like a mop?
Types of Treaking ?
What is America's oldest brewery?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Sandpiper, Greater Sage-Grouse
Why might the 2023 MLB season break the record for total runs scored in a single regular season?
What climate are cacti typically found in?
Who invented basketball?
What literary technique is used in the phrase “simmered on a smooth summer sidewalk”?
Write a poem about George Washington.
Write a few sentences explaining the criteria you used to choose your favorite fast food restaurant.
Who are the last 7 soccer fifa men's world cup winners?
The type of bicycle you buy will depend on a few different variables to consider. Are you looking for a city, hybrid, folding or off roading bike? How much are you looking to spend on the bicycle is also important when making these decisions as there are several hundred options out there to choose from. There are also options to customize bicycles.
When is the best time to buy house in USA
Who married Beyonce in 2008?
Identify which of these animals live in water and which live on land: elephants, wolves, sharks, dolphins, cows, raccoons, pigs.
Tell me some key points about Narmada river from the given text.
In the field of economics, what is considered a monopoly?
Which is a species of fish? Bass or Treble
Name some of the most well known soccer players in the world
What are some important points about the Battle of the Bulge?
What tree nut is commonly used when making pesto?
Summarize in bullet points some methods used to produce verdigris.
Is voluntary childlessness rising? If yes, then what are the major drivers? What could be its impact?
Who is István Szalay?
What was Skippy ( on TV )
Which is a species of fish? Golden Retriever or Goldfish
What are fun activities to do in New Orleans?
What is Time magazine?
What is a chemical structure?
Why was it unclear who won the race?
How hard is it to learn how to ski?
Can I copy my Delta Lake table to another location?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Paila criolla, Topshur
Do you get scared?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Gbedu, Guitalele
Who was the Colossus of Rhodes a likeness of?
What factors influence mental health issues in young people?
What is Heineken Evergreen?
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Aixam, Buick
Please give me details about the French submarine Requin
According to the paragraph below, what is the relationship between Dungeon Master and Venger?
What kind of plant is the Harrisonia
What is an adjective?
How many oscars India won this year 2023?
Which one is good for health coffee or tea
Who is the author of the Sound and the Fury
What are some contributions of women in computing?
Who was Elizabeth II?
Tell me a silly, short poem about sheep where the first letter of each new line when read from top to bottom spells out a secret message.
Based on the following paragraph on water, what makes water cohesive.
From the passage provided, extract the GSDP of Andhra Pradesh
How can the climate be warming if I keep getting blizzards in my town?
What is a Treasury Bond?
What is the best song from Rihanna
What are the books in the 'A Song of Ice and Fire' series and when were they released?
Who is Romulo Betancourt?
What is the name of the family at the centre of the TV show Succession?
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of the police?
Why are cats better than dogs?
Of the items, tomato, broccoli, plane, sausage, pineapple, grass, honey, and milk would a human not like to consume?
Which countries are the world's largest or biggest manufacturer in terms of $ value?
All planets in our solar system rotate on their axis either in a clockwise or anti-clockwise direction. Tell me which planets have clockwise rotation, and which have anti-clockwise rotations. The planets are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Which singer’s real name is Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta?
Who wrote The Picture of Dorian Grey in 1891
Given this paragraph, who wrote and directed Heads I Win, Tails You Lose
How do you reverse sear a steak on the Big Green Egg?
Give me a bulleted list of ideas for a viral youtube video
What NFL team was moved out of Ohio and became the Baltimore Ravens in 1996?
Given this paragraph about London, give me a reason why the London Docklands became a focus for regeneration in the 1980s.
What are the most crowded surf spots in the world
Which of these is bigger than a breadbox?

Dog, cat, mouse, hydrogen atom, tree, spider, Jupiter, credit card, baseball, basketball, bus, the statue of liberty, a meteorite, an asteroid, Elvis
Write an apology letter to my wife for eating the last of the Oreo cookies and drinking the last of the milk.
Classify each of the following as either a city or a country: Delhi, China, Tokyo, Australia, India, Kuala Lumpur, Egypt, Morocco, Paris, London, Finland, Dubai, Angola, Chennai, Cape Town, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Ecuador, Sao Paulo, Toronto, Iran, Moscow, Berlin, Slovenia, Prague, Italy, Milan, Argentina, Cuba, Cambodia, Brunei, Jakarta, Manila
Why do people need money?
Who were Hank Williams early musical influences?
Identify the bird from the list: Lint, Linnet, Lining
Tell me whether these dog breeds need lots of exercise: Golden Retriever, German Shepherd, Springer, Husky, French Bulldog, Pekingese, Pomeranian, Chihuahua
What are ways to improve running speed?
What are some good ice cream toppings that are gross when mixed together?
Tell me about Joseph Anthony
What is a lab environment?
Where will the third Summer Olympic Games be held?
Write a review of Roger Zalazny's Lord of Light
When would a railway be considered a heritage railway?
How does Windows Fast Startup Work?
Why do sheep keepers paint their sheep?
what is the best song produced by the band Rush
Who is the greatest NFL quarterback of all-time?
What are some good non-textbook resources for someone to learn more about the world wars?
Given this reference text about Jane Goodall, tell me how old she is, and her most notable accomplishments.
What happened at the 1936 United States presidential election
What is a sight-reading contest?
What are the New Rules for 2022?
What is the typical math curriculum for a 5th grader
Given a reference text about LIV Golf, tell me what "LIV" means, when it was started and who financed it.
Would each of the following conditions be good or bad for a bike ride? Pouring rain, sunny skies, hail, cloudy day, dense fog, heavy wind, light breeze.
What is the Six Flags Great Escape Lodge
Best Bengali singer
Why is the ocean blue?
Summarize the meaning of "Lovers" in the slogan "Virginia is for lovers"
What business strategies or initiatives do you think will be key to Uber's long-term growth?
what is the Bieh State
What is the timeline for the band Level 42?
What do players of American football wear helmets? Write the response as if your are an American explaining to a coworker from another country.
Write a short paragraph about experiencing a safari in South Africa.
what are coolest things to do in Amsterdam
These actors appeared in a film as certain characters.  What are the names of the actors sorted in order of last name?
Give me a list of luxury watches to buy
iPhone 14 pro vs Samsung s22 ultra
Categorize the companies based on their ownership status as private or public.
Twitter, SpaceX, Tesla
Who is Antonello Padovano
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Timpani, Maguhu
What is the difference between Kinesis and Kafka?
Which of these are both movies and books: Harry Potter, Lord of the Rings, Brave World, The Shawshank Redemption.
Is it possible to grow muscle after an age of 35?
Who does what in U2?
What is freedom?
What type of animal was: Hobbes, Snoopy, Garfield, and Dumbo.
Given this paragraph about the tour de france, how many riders are in the tour
Given a reference text about Taylor Fritz, tell me what country he's from and his best finish at a Grand Slam tournament?
In which popular 1970s educational computer game could a character die of dysentery or drowning due to a poorly-caulked wagon?
Given this paragraph about Robert Russell, what is he known for?
how is white rice made?
What do you say to someone who is struggling with addiction?
Write a paragraph to refute a claim by a colleague that ancient structures such as Stonehenge, the Great Pyramid are evidence of UFO activities on Earth
Which are the top 5 cities in population
Give me a numbered list of non Indian cricket players who made their debut in Indian Premier League (IPL) before they played a single first class match
How many planets are there in our solar system?
What is a zamboni?
What was the twist in this short story?
How do you make an Old Fashioned Cocktail?
Where in Australia is Palm Cove located?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Wiwaxia, Penguin
From the passage provided, extract the list of Indian winners of the Academy Awards. Separate them with a comma.
What type of toilets do RVs have?
Based on this passage about Ted Kennedy, at the time of his death, who were the three longest-serving senators of all time?
Kingston, Zuma, and Apollo are the sons of which American female pop star?
Name some famous breweries in Seattle
Which planets are part of the inner solar system and which are part of the outer solar system?
Whose life is the 1965 film 'The Sound of Music' based on?
What is absolute address in memory?
Extract the top 4 teams in the Champions League of 2020-2021 season. Each row should have a team name and country of a team separated by comma
Is it easy for American technology companies to open an office in Dubai?
What is Objective-C?
Is euthanasia ethical?
List the principles that are used in chemical engineering where each new line starts with "- ". Do not say anything else.
Tell me which of these US Presidents was Republican or Democrat: Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter
Tell me whether these are primary or secondary colors: Yellow, Blue, Green, Orange, Red, Violet
From the passage provided, which runways are used in the West Plan?
What is the best format for storing data in a lakehouse?
What is Freeride snowboarding?
Based on the paragraph below, the failure to uphold the commitments outlined in Magna Carta lead to what war?
Which American cultural artifacts are most known worldwide?
What are the main types of Thai curries?
Which company constructed the Japanese submarine Yu 12?
What can a work group do to promote psychological safety?
List of the biggest oceans in the world
Give me a list of things I can do with my apple iwatch
What is Sir Charles Lyell best known for?
Extract the name of the comedy films that Cage performed in. Separate them with a comma.
What is a pineapple?
You have purchased a product with which you are satisfied. Write a short review describing your experience the product: "Unisex Anti Fog No Leaking Swimming Goggles with Adjustable Silicone for Men Women Adult Youth".
Tell me about the Film carreer in points of actress Richa Soni
What are signs my partner is cheating?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Shazam, Thor
In what year was Peter born?  Use roman numerals.
Given this reference text about Bougainville Island, what is its land area?
Give a short bulleted list of the academic positions held by Sechrest. Each bullet should have the name of the university and the titles that Sechrest had in that university.
Artemis I was formerly known as
When did Christoph Karl von Piacsek serve as a Hungarian officer?
Who is the best selling music artist?
What do political scientists mean when they refer to “home-style”?
Classify each of the following countries or cities: Spain, France, Norway, Brazil, Atlanta, Budapest, China, India, Tampa, London, Denmark, Sweden, Stockholm, Beijing, Amsterdam
Classify each of the following as either birds or mammals: Eagle, Bear, Deer, Finch, Owl, Cat, Dog, Rat, Human, Whale, Raven
What is the best club soccer team in Spain?
What things could a high school graduate do in a gap year between high school and college?
How can I learn to snowboad?
Describe the video game crash of 1983 in 2 sentences.
What is the difference between Oculus Quest 2 and Meta Quest 2 VR headsets?
From the given passage, find out why companies would announce their future products much in advance.
Do I need to make my bed everyday?
What is a SCOBY in kombucha making?
What is the value of x if x^2 = 4?
How do you do meal prep efficiently and make cooking easy?
What would make my tzatziki sauce truly exceptional?
What is a verb?
What is the state bird of Texas?
Name some famous Schubert's pieces
Are you going for a walk today?
Which of these cities in the United States of America are the capital of their state: Albany, Albuquerque, Anchorage,  Ann Arbor, Annapolis?
What is Squash the sport?
List down some important facts about Indigo airlines
What are the top 5 countries in terms of life expectancy?
What are some common types of monstera?
What is ADO connection?
What are the potential source of energy for an engine?
Classify each of the following as either a planet, a star, or a galaxy:  Mercury, Venus, Polaris, Earth, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Milky Way, Andromeda, Saturn, Virgo A, Maffei 1, Uranus, Neptune, Sirius, Vega.
Come up with gift ideas for your girlfriend
I am registering for gifts for my wedding and need to include items that would be useful in my new home. Which items are household items that can be given as a wedding gift: blender, coffee maker, bus fare, towels, sheets, skateboard, cell phone, car, dishes, silverware, gym membership, glassware, tuxedo, brake pads, bicycle, picture frames
What is the total number of geographical entities (states, territories, regions) in Africa?
What city did Beatrice Prior live in?
Does multitasking make someone more productive at work?
What is self advocacy?
What is the structure of Public Forum debate, as used in US debate competitions?
From the passage provided, extract the official language of Tamil Nadu.
From the passage provided find the names of the creators of Kafka. Separate them with a comma.
Where is Jasienica?
Give me the Seven Wonders of the Industrial World:
What are some of the most famous rock bands from Seattle, Washington?
What are a couple of ways to increase profitability?
What is the philosophy of the movie Up?
What is a graph in graph theory?
How many cities in the world have a population exceeding 5 million people ?
What is pseudoscience?
Should I use a dynamic microphone or a condenser microphone for recording a podcast? What about streaming on twitch or making youtube videos? Should I ever use a ribbon microphone?
Classify each of the following as either a great house or minor house in the series "A Song of Ice and Fire": Targaryen, Stark, Tyrell, Martell, Greyjoy, Baratheon, Lannister, Cerwyn, Karstark, Hornwood, Merryweather, Tarly
Why do humans like dogs?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Wood block, Akkordolia
Which was the 5th largest recipient of FDI in world in 2020
Given this paragraph about Password-authenticated key exchange, what year were the first provably-secure protocols created?
Rank American Presidents
How do you wheelie a motorcycle?
Who were the founding members of id Software?
who won the oscar 2023 for best original song music
Tell me whether those are countries or cities: Paris, Amsterdam, South Africa, Australia, Vienna, Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, Argentina
What is a side slide in aviation?
Summarize the different types of firestop pillows.
How do I build a campfire?
Who was Manchester United's most successful manager?
Is Moore's law still viable?
Name the moon rocket that NASA is going to launch thru Space Launch System vehicle
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Crystallophone, Kacapi
Why can't the whole world be 2 countries?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tubular bells, Cuataro
What are the top 10 songs on the Billboard Year End list from 1987?
What's next generation energy?
What do I need to know about drones to become a hobbyist drone pilot?
Write a sarcastic apology letter to a neighbor after they complained about you being too loud in the middle of the day. Make it no longer than three sentences.
Tell me whether these are mammals or amphibians: Kangaroo, Hellbender, Horse, Taita African Caecilian, Monkey, Pangolins, Squirrel, Frogs
Classify each of these car manufacturers as either French, German, American, Japanese, or other: Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, DS, Ford, Tesla, Fiat, KIA
Provide a bulleted list of 5 cool things to do in Europe
What is Ruby?
From the text, extract the ships commanded by Charles Henry Bromedge Caldwell
What is the typical lifespan of a dog?
Is C++ hard to learn?
Tell me who the first three countries to give women the vote were. Give it to me in a bulleted list.
What are the best Sherlock Holmes short stories?
Classify the below companies based on their market capitalization.
Reliance, Adani Enterprise, Tanla, Globus Spirits, Apollo Hospitals, NELCO, Zee Entertainment Enterprises Ltd
Who are the best golfers of all time?
You and your friends are discussing the best tier ratings of common London-based football teams. You are trying to determine whether Chelsea F.C., Arsenal F.C., Tottenham Hotspur F.C., West Ham United F.C., Fulham F.C. and Crystal Palace F.C. are considered by fans to be the 'best', 'ok' and 'worst'.
List the architects who designed Klovska station
Given a reference text about José Francisco Miguel António de Mendonça, tell me when he was appointed patriarch and when he died.
Explain the answer to this riddle: What has four legs in the morning, two legs in the afternoon, and three legs in the evening?
Kingsway a 3 km stretch was built as a ceremonial boulevard by whom?
Why are plants green?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Reptil, Beast Boy
What would you suggest as to how someone could sell a bike?
Where is the corporate headquarters of Adobe Systems?
We all know the saying "what goes up must come down," but what goes up but does not come down?
How do I make a traditional Bolognese sauce?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Violetta, Kaval
List some American candy bars that have chocolate and caramel.
Given this paragraph about the domestication of mammals, tell me the earliest known time period in which dairying occurred and also give me the location.
How does increasing interest rates impact inflation?
Give me some tips for increase my savings
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Bass guitar, Duduk
Name three national parks in California.
Why is the University of Waterloo the best school for software engineering?
Who were the Ottomans?
What teams were a part of the 2021 Valletta Cup?
I'm putting together an exercise plan that needs to have both cardio and strength exercises, but I want to separate exercises into each category. Running, deadlifts, cycling, pushups, swimming, jump rope,  lunges and squats.
What is the mona lisa?
Who is the prime minister of India
What is VTEC?
What was the result and impact of the First Battle of Tannenberg?
On television what was Flipper
From the passage below, extract the first five member countries of OPEC
World Wrestling Championship 2022 was held in
Which era of counterculture were the Beatles pivotal to?
Given a reference text about Listeriosis, tell me how how the bacterium is transfered into animals, and people.
How do airplanes fly?
How can introverts maintain friendship.
Are these blue or red colors? Pink, navy, maroon, mahogany, teal, sky, robin, scarlet
Where can I find Leptodactylus tapiti?
Give me a simpler way to tell someone that Layli and Majnun is Persian literature that borrows storytelling techniques from Varqeh and Golshah, Orwa wa Afra, Vameq and Ozra, Metiochus and Parthenope, and Vis and Ramin.
Tell me which of the following items are trees and which ones are weeds: aspen, ash, chickweed, crabgrass, oak, almond, dandelion
Why do people enjoy baseball?
Write do's and don'ts for handling a PR crisis. Make them directive and easy for anyone to understand and follow.
Why do people need sunshine?
What is the best northeast mountain for skiing?
Who are the main songwriters for the Grateful Dead?
What day is Halloween?
What is standard guitar tuning?
From the following passage, extract 3 common phenomena related to electricity.
Please provide a list of best movies from Shahrukh Khan.
What is C?
What is a merchant bank?
What is the nickname for Spokane, Washington?
The French flair is the way the French see life, it has to be grandiose in the sense that even the small thing can be beautiful, stylish, and unique. There is a special French flair in Rugby, where it comes with the sense that anything can happen, even the more desperate attack would be fully supported and played like a final rally, full of bravery. This type of behavior is feared as it is based on improvisation, and has been in the past very efficient even against the very best.
What is the TSA church?
From the passage provided, extract the founders of Bloomberg L.P. Separate them with a comma.
Why are people migrating in the US from the NE and Mid-West to the South and SE?
What is the best indoor plant?
What are the top 3 GDP countries in 2022?
What is Power BI?
What are some ways to tenderize beef?
Explain the Montessori Method of education in pre-school and kindergarten
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what popular neural network architecture architecture are they based on?
Who invented the first car?
Provide a brief summary of how the ISO 27001 standard works
Why do my plants keep dying?
What are the10 best NCAA Basketball programs all-time?
Tell me whether these are Major League Baseball or National Basketball Association teams: Yankees, Astros, Dodgers, Pirates and Padres.
From the paragraph provided, extract the recurring characters from Final Fantasy.  Separate them with a comma.
What is Mexico?
What happened to Captain Bligh after the Mutiny on the Bounty?
Why was Tamazulapam del Espíritu Santo placed under quarantine?
how many times did India won the cricket world cup
Write a journal entry from the pandemic.
Extract the members of the band Radiohead in a comma separated list.
Tell me about the life and career of Alison Calder
In World Athletic Championship Eugene, Oregon, Neeraj Chopra won the Silver medal by throwing how many meters
What is SQL?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Ghost Rider, Atomic Skull
What are teeth?
Please list all the countries having hosted a Rugby World Cup before 2023 according to the text
How is CAC 40 selected?
Which of the following numbers are prime?

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 2^11-1, 14, 17, 29, 47
Name the affiliates of the Tata Group.
Who is Carol Banawa?
Based on the information below, when might people have started baking bread?
Can animals like dog and cat get Kidney Stones ?
Where can I learn more about Kubernetes?
In relation to working out, what is a bench press, and how do you perform it?
What kind of newspaper is the Secolo d'Italia
Provide a list of ten countries that don't have any ocean borders, in alphabetical order.
What is the scientific name for a jaguar?
Which of the following numbers are used in numbered golf irons: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
How do you care for a pet?
Given a reference text about Mikel Artetxe Guezuraga, tell me when he turned professional and what his biggest wins are.
As per Bernoulli's principle what should the sum of kinetic energy, potential energy and internal energy be?
Give a list of the different kinds of fire trucks that exist.
Which state in the US has the highest GDP?
Tell me whether these are cars or CA Amtrak lines: Tesla Model 3, Capitol Corridor, Chevy Nova, Honda Accord, California Zephyr, Subaru Impreza, Coast Starlight, Pacific Surfliner, San Joaquins
What is digestion?
What happened in Woodstock
Why Rock Climbing so popular? Is rock climbing a good sport?
Classify the names based on whether they start with ’N’ or ‘M’
Nancy, Mandi, Michelle, Mark, Naomi, Nick
Can you please show some details regarding the comedy film Bjorck Family using given text as a reference
List as many types of craft beer as you can
What are five creative ways to use paper?
What are some ways to reuse smoked brisket?
Q: Am I eligible for a booster dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and if so, which one?
How easy and safe is it to replace the brakes on your car by yourself?
Could I beat a wolf in a fight?
What was Hurricane Ian?
Which is a disease? Asthma, Depression, Cancer, AIDS, Schizophrenia, Tuberculosis, PTSD
Frank Sinatra changed the lyrics of "The Lady is a Tramp" to "The Lady is a" what?
You are a young citizen of a developing country. Write a letter in less than 150 words to a newspaper, highlighting your concern over incorrect disposal of biomedical waste and to spread awareness of the same.
From the passage provided, extract the number of casualties by nation during World War II
From the passage provided, extract the alternative name of Lætitia Sadier.
Give me a list of Serie A winners in the last five years with corresponding points.
What do redshifts tell astronomers?
How can I help to improve my son's tennis skills?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
From the passage, list the most influential works of Rumi. Separate them with a comma.
Summarise the following text using different wording than in the original: "A well-known Russian military blogger was killed in an explosion at a cafe in St. Petersburg on Sunday, officials said, in what appeared to be an audacious attack on a high-profile pro-Kremlin figure. Vladlen Tatarsky died when a blast tore through the cafe where he was appearing as a guest of a pro-war group called Cyber Front Z. Authorities said they were treating the case as suspected murder. Twenty-five other people were injured in the blast, 19 of whom were hospitalized, the city’s governor said. The Russian Ministry of Health said six people were in critical condition. Investigators were questioning everyone who was inside the cafe, state media reported. Photos of the scene showed extensive damage to the building in which the cafe was located."
Using this paragraph about Matt Eskandari, did Matt Eskandri make any films before Victim?
In which book would you find the manservant Pas Partout
What is Tableau?
which is the silicon valley of India.
Who directed the Game of Thrones season three episode titled "Kissed by Fire"?
What programming language does Spark support?
Which Baseball team won the 2016 World Series?
What are the best types of pets for a family with kids?
What is the best way to clean a cast iron pan that is heavily soiled?
Which of these is edible or not edible:
1. Banana
2. Laptop
3. Marmite
4. Tape
5. Mushroom
6. Pizza
What is table tennis and why is it popular
Who is the largest employer in the world?
Group these animals into 2-legged and 4-legged categories:  kangaroo, dog, rhino, lion, giraffe, penguin, chimpanzee and cat.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Martell?
What is the history of the national commission for aerospace research and development
What is a dwarf planet ?
Given the following paragraph, where did the L'Aquila earth occur?
From the passage provided, list the traits which are often associated with Procrastination (in a comma separated manner).
Is switchgrass a good biofuel source?
Explain the expression "the days are long, and the years are short" as it relates to raising children.
What would Abraham Lincoln think of Big Data and Agile Development?
Based on the reference text, provide a bulleted list of the benefits workers receive from Proposition 22
I have 3 apples, Jack has 4 pears and Jill has 5 books. After I ate 5 of Jack's pears, how many fruits we have in total now?
What awards did Zach Edey win?
There are seven birds standing on a tree branch. A hunter shot on one of the birds. How many birds are left on the branch?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Thenn?
How do I run faster?
In France if you were served le miel what would you eat
How many subscribers are inside the United States?
Let's say you have one million dollars, how are you going to invest that?
What are some of the most popular tourist attractions to visit in Sydney?
What channel did the series begin on?
What are some great progressive rock bands?
Where did xiaolongbao originate from and what are some key types
Was Samuel Wesley the founder of the Methodist Church?
What is the meaning of life and how do I have a fulfilling one?
What is Ford
What marathon did the first woman officially finish, based on the paragraph.
Who is Ibrahima Tamba?
What should I check when planning a trip?
When was the first episode of Big Brother on CBS?
What is a Tide?
Is a hotdog a sandwich?
From the passage provided, extract the year in which Elizabeth Taylor moved to Los Angeles
what is the meaning of life?
Given this text, what are the oldest and newest major territories of the United States?
Describe what your ideal pet cat would look like, and what you would name it.
Who are the last 10 Masters Champions?
How many soccer teams are in the English Premier League?
Classify these animals as either mammals, reptiles, birds, or other: king cobra, honey badger, whale, black kite, salmon, and French poodle
In what city was the first season of MTV's The Real World filmed?
Why are some places in the world warmer than others?
Why do huskies howl?
Why are emotions important when day trading?
What is the list of top hybrid cars in the US market in 2023
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Silkmoth, Roman snail
Imagine you're planning a ski trip with your friends. What are some good areas to go skiing?
Best sports in the world
Rank these transportation mode with respect to their CO2 impact from largest to smallest: train, plane, car
What is Audemars Piguet Royal Oak ?
Given a reference text about George Koukou, tell me when he was arrested and why.
How can I improve my table tennis skills?
What is a noun?
Give me a list of 3 good ways to gain weight.
What was Barthelemy Hus-Desforges famous for
What is an Edgeworth box in Economics?
How can I reduce my carbon footprint?
Which state in the United States the is best?
Does Indermaur work as CTO, CEO, or CFO?
Who won the Golden Shoe Award for the season 2018-2019?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Zatula, Jarana huasteca
What is the first evidence of a boomerang?
How do you start your child playing soccer?
What is the best-selling book of all time?
Given this text, what is the third wealthiest state in the USA?
What is the difference between earphones and headphones?
Give me a comma separated list of nicknames given to Dan Campbell and who gave him the nickname
What is the minimum feature a cell phone should have to avoid addiction
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Goje, Dizi
What is the difference between a coastal cruising and blue water sailboat?
Given this paragraph about the Roman temple known as the Pantheon, tell me whether we definitively know why the temple was called the Pantheon.
How to find the area of a rectangle?
Give me a list of the Adventure motorbikes that I can buy on my LAMS (Learner Approved Motorcycle Scheme) restriction, living in Australia
Which is a species of fish? Turbot or Turbo
From the passage identify the names of Zeus’s Roman counterpart. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Give me a list of the best movies that are sequels
What is Venture Capital?
What are the different air routes for traveling between Genova (GOA) and San Francisco (SFO) from fastest to longest?
I do not trust you
What nationality was Morse inventor of the famous code
Give me a bulleted list of different ways to get around a city without a car
Where did Father's Day originate?
List the ten episode titles from the fourth season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Which of these items will be useful to pack when I’m getting ready for soccer practice: cleats, grass, guitar, water bottle, shin guards, helmet.
Is Leonidas from Sparta a real man? What was he famous for?
I need some ideas for a first date.
Who wrote Gone with the Wind
From the passage provided, extract the sobriquets Tagore was known by. Separate them with a comma.
Given a reference text about the Northern Colorado Bears, tell me the different conferences their teams compete in.
How many continents are there on Earth?
What are some common descriptive statistics?
Which building is the most higher?
What is the male population in Madaria?
Tell me whether these are animals or apache projects or both:
Kudu, Impala, Alligator, Ant, Camel, Flink, Spark, Flume, Tomcat, Dog, Elephant
Is plastic bad for us?
A las vegas seven days trip itinerary including budget and activities for a group of 5 friends.
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Scarlet Witch, Zatanna
Give a numbered list of instructions to set up a snowboard. The items I can use are a snowboard, snowboard bindings, a screwdriver, screws, and a measuring tape.
What fruit is wine produced from?
What are the primary grapes in a red Bordeaux?
What are some different types of salt?
Do you have an idea of why Graviton didn’t perform better?
Given this paragraph about Corsica, when was Napoleon Bonaparte born and where?
What are the words of House Karstark?
How many angels can dance on the head of a pin?
What is the movie "Everything Everywhere All at Once" about?
Why do people like cats?
If you were a vegetable, what vegetable would you be?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Stomp box, Gunjac
Given this paragraph about the movie 'The Bridge on the River Kwai', why did the writers have to work in secret?
What is the largest fresh water lake?
Describe a tense scene of a dystopian future where a human in a laboratory is attempting to transform her body into a cyborg.
What are the lightweight weight requirements at the collegiate level in the United States?
Where is Stargate Command located in the Stargate universe.
Based on the given text, do beavers eat wood or do they only chop down trees for dams?
Classify each of the following as either even or odd number: 1, 3, 15, 24, 56, 47, 4, 88, 13, 10, 74, 35, 99, 82, 6, 59, 73, 12, 68, 9.
What was the first full-length animated movie that Disney released?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Hedgehog, Sea-monkey
How do you play blackjack?
How is it that some high net-worth individuals are able to avoid paying taxes completely?
Tell me whether these are songs or video games: Madden, Fifa, Gimme Shelter, Running on Empty, New York New York, Call of Duty Modern Warfare, Fortnite, Sunday Morning, Mario Kart, Wonderwall
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Vision, Red Tornado
How would you build a winning basketball team?
give me a list of all the ways a person can hydrate
Why do people like working from home?
What does a 9 carat gold mean
Extract all the geographical places from the following passage: On Thursday we flew to Sandakan in Sabah. The Qatar flight had several newspapers available for passengers to read. On the front page of all of them were stories about Saddam Hussein and the invasion of Iraq.  When we arrived in Borneo, we saw a two-page spread in a newspaper that dove into the history of Kurdistan. The very next article celebrated the liberation of Baghdad, the city juxtaposed against a backdrop of New York City in the United States.
What are some of the uses of gilding metal?
Given these paragraphs about the founding of Tesla, who else part from Elon Musk and J. B. Straubel are co-founders of Tesla?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Honda, Buick
What is the First Amendment of the US constitution?
Who is Lewis Hamilton of Formula 1?
Who was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, and which prizes did she win?
I've heard astronauts talk about the normalization of deviance and the risks therein.  What is the normalization of deviance, and how do I avoid it?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Avengers, Justice League of America
Which is a species of fish? Loach or Poach
Should I buy an electric car?
From the example given in this paragraph, what is an eigenvector?
How to make movies?
Which President of the US was less of a hawk than people supposed?
From the given text, can you please extract all possible technical details of the aeroplane in the JSON format {key:value} where key is the attribute and value is the data for the attribute.
What are the different phases in systems development life cycle?
What are the three teams in the mobile game Pokemon Go?
when was the first digital electronic calculating machine developed?
What batting traits make a good baseball or softball hitter?
Can you give me some background on Perez v. Campbell
How many national championships has Nick Saban won at Alabama?
Name a few famous Dutch artists, and the respective movements for which they are known.
From the given text, Please list some points about The International School of Beijing
What is Ethiopia known for from agriculture perspective?
What is the history of Afrobeats?
What are the main cat personality types?
What Are Qualified Expenses for approved Use of 529 accounts?
Art Garfunkel initially declined to sing one of Simon & Garfunkel's biggest hits solo. Which song is it?
Given this article about Operation Aurora, Which nation was beleived to be behund the attacks?
How can I make my bike more aerodynamic?
What group is known for introducing wine growing to California?
What would you do if you had all the resources in the world and nothing to worry about?
What's a gaya melon? How does it taste like?
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Aston Martin, Cadillac
Who was Singhari Shyamasundar Kar
Classify each of the following as either an insect or a worm: tequila worm, silk worm, glow worm, inchworms, earthworms, tapeworm, hookworm, liver fluke, threadworm
Based on this paragraph, where was the The Ford Telstar sold?
Classify the below companies based on their market capitalization into Small Cap and Large Cap.
Gravita, MapmyIndia, Airtel, Carysil
What are the top 5 television sitcoms of all time?
How many member states does the European Union have?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Padayani thappu, Qanun
Why is Grand Canyon a big deal?
What is dry ice?
For whom was Harvard University named?
Given a reference text about Wagyu, tell me the different types of cattle that are together known as wagyu.
Why are most plans green?
What was the record for University of Miami Hurricanes in 1980?
Who recieves a dowry?
is keto diet healthy?
Extract the total population and total area of California from the reference text
What is alexa?
What country is the newest member of NATO?
What is the difference between Columbia and Colombia.
What is Auto Loader?
What is Sci-fi fantasy?
Summarise the history of the origin of the Kievan Rus' name
Extract the names of the four Grand Slam tournaments and list them using bullets. Include the months of the year when each of the tournaments is generally played.
Classify the countries based on their continents.
Ethiopia, Nigeria, Angola, India, China, Brazil, Mexico
Provide legal ways to pay less taxes in the USA.
Extract and list the names of characters a player can control in The Last of Us mentioned in the paragraph. Also describe relationships between those characters.
Give me 5 strategies to receive a strong performance review
What is Oktoberfest
Who regulates companies in Australia?
How many James Bond movies did Daniel Craig star in?
A square has angles of 30 degrees, 90 degrees and 150 degrees. What is the last angle in the square?
What are the advantages of a progressive consumption tax?
Sort these into breakfast or dinner foods: Waffles, pancakes, turkey, chicken noodle soup, salad, bacon and eggs, egg drop soup
Imagine you are the CEO of Tiktok and have to give an argument in front of the Senate on why the US should not ban Tiktok.
Name the academic institutions which John Cena attended.
classify the following spending items as either grocery, entertainment, food & drink, travel, bills: costco, netflix, uber, restaurant, rent, lyft
Extract a list of notable dates and events in the mentioned text in the format, choosing the earliest year when the text provides a range of dates, and place them in a bullet list: {Year} - {Event}
Which F1 drivers race for Red Bull Racing in the 2023 season?
Where should I go on vacation?
Who won the 1988 Superbowl
What is lacrosse?
Given this paragraph, how much control of the world's cocaine market did the Cali Cartel have at its peak?
Extract the 2021 Total Profit or Operating Income from the following text
When was hailstorm island first photographed given this text
Give me a list of the five most recent NBA champions.
Which of the following items is the odd one out? Pacific, Atlantic, Baltic and Indian
Who was Edward Gramlich
Why do people like to ski?
What happens when you meditate?
Give me a list of the most agreed upon supplements that are effective for maintaining general health
What is the Oakland Ski Club?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Xenacanthus, Seal
How long do bears hibernate?
What form of government is the United Kingdom?
What is the standard loft of a pitching wedge in golf?
Please summarize Micky Mouse's initial licensing and merchandising history
What is Targetted Allele-Specific CRISPR/Cas9 Activation (TASCA)?
What is a lepton?
Can dogs look up?
Give me some great quotes about surviving in the wild.
What are the best camps ideas for kids?
Extract the total number of employees  in 2021 at Westpac Bank in Australia?
if you have 2 ducks in front of a duck and 2 ducks behind a duck in a row, minimum how many ducks you have?
What are the main disadvantages of electric cars versus combustion engine vehicles?
Who developed calculus and when was it discovered?
Which is a species of fish? Pleco or Place
Is there any benefit to pain?
Who was the president of China before Xi?
What made C. Shannon Bacon famous
Write a concise and somewhat funny email about making a betting pool for the 2023 Masters golf tournament
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Dodge, Foton
Can you offer tips for visiting Mexico City for fun?
what is petrified wood
Give me a list of Indian dishes that I can make for a house party
What is the origin of the western numeral system?
Given a reference text about the incudomalleolar joint, tell me its main function.
What is the size a tennis ball?
Where was the first ever India and USA armed forces Tri-Services Exercise Tiger Triumph help?
How long is a professional football field.
Which of these are dog and which are birds: Phoenix, Siberian Husky, Alaskan Malamute, Hawk, Border Collie, Labrador,  Araucana
What is viscosity?
How does a paraglider work?
Classify each of these mammals as either marsupial or placental
What's Jiang's theoretical contribution?
What are some common ways to manage Type 1 Diabetes?
Why and how are people choosing to electrify their homes?
are the following musical instruments or not?
typewriter
computer
guitar
violin
flute
bedsheets
bat
ball
piano
harmonium
tabla
blinds
What is an AVA when it comes to wine?
What is the “infield” in baseball?
Which Philip K. Dick novel was the basis for the movie "Blade Runner"?
Why do you love Biriyani?
Classify each of the following as an electric or gas vehicle: Tesla Model Y, Kia Telluride, Lexus IS250, Mustang Mach-e, Chevy Bolt, Toyota Rav4
Why is the Alabama's football team called the Crimson Tide?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the most important facts about the country Norway
What is a nickname of Jiang Zemin
Given the reference text below, what is Isthmohyla debilis?
Given this reference text about cargo ships, when was the USS West Gate launched?
Who was the American president for the majority of WWII?
In Frank Herbert's Dune novel, why is the spice valuable?
Why do people read books?
What is the largest amount of money in coins without being able to make change for a dollar?
separate the following into chilldrens and adults cartoons.
recess
rugrats
big mouth
swat cats
inside job
popeyes
dexters lab
king of the hill
south park
Why do humans need to have friends?
Which Greek god is associated with the changing of the seasons?
From the passage provided, what year did the Covenant attack?
Make me a menu for a dinner party which will use up potatoes, cherry tomatoes, salmon and heavy cream I have that is about to expire. The menu should have three courses and a dessert, and shouldn't include eggs due to the current egg shortage. Describe the order in which each food would be served.
What are few different ways to describe the changing shape of the moon?
Name a song written by Hank Williams?
From the passage provided, summarise the key phases of sunset.
What do you get by substituting the oxygen in the isocyanate group with a sulfur?
Which is a bird or fish: Redfin perch, Red-breasted merganser
What is Age of Empires?
What is it called when a river of water falls off a cliff and creates a shower?
What is the birthday problem?
Where is the Willis Tower located?
Which of the following would be considered assets on a financial statement: Inventory, Revenue, Leases, Accounts Payable, Retained Earnings, Cash, Treasury Bills
How long did World War 2 last?
What are some of the causes for the 1929 US stock market crash?
What is District 13 in "The Hunger Games" known for developing?
From the following list, tell me whether these animals are real of fictitious: unicorn, alpaca, kangaroo rat, griffin, centaur, colossal squid
What is a Wonton?
From the passage provided, extract the freight train companies using the corridor.  Place them in a bullet list.
Classify the below Noble prize winners based on whether they received the prize in 2022 or 2021.
Carolyn Bertozzi, Alain Aspect, Maria Ressa, Abdulrazak Gurnah
where do aliens come from
What is a data pipeline?
What is the population of North Carolina?
Is the Wetmorena agasepsoides a lizard
Who is the most popular president ever in the USA?
What are the three most common types of radioactive decay?
How many Olympic rings are there?
Which book of Douglas Hofstadter won the Pulitzer Prize?
How should I decorate my living room wall? Can you provide some tips and ideas?
who is considered the father of computers?
Why does my back hurt?
What kind of cancer did Agent Dana Scully get diagnosed with in "The X-Files"?
Quel a été l'impact de la révolution française ?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Plowman?
What makes an organization standout?
How can I quickly treat a headache?
What checks should be done when a data pipeline fails
List the sectoral weightage allocation in Nifty 50 as mentioned in the above passage. Use the format ‘Sector Name - Percentage’ in a numbered list to depict the results and also sort the result based on highest allocation percentage to the lowest.
What is Acyl-CoA?
Given the reference text about the city of Cologne and its wildlife, can I expect to see any cats in Cologne?
What kind of jelly is best for a peanut butter and jelly sandwich?
Why do humans like dogs?
What American city is referred to as The City of Roses?
Which of the following are women scientists: Marie Curie, Elizabeth Blackwell, Jane Goodall, Rosalind Franklin, Ada Lovelace, Maria Mitchell, Archimedes, Albert Einstein, Ernest Rutherford, Alfred Nobel, Alexander Fleming, Michael Faraday, Niels Bohr, Stephen Hawking, Alan Turing.
Which of the following are noble gases: helium, sodium, neon, oxygen, argon, hydrogen, calcium, magnesium, lithium, boron, krypton, nitrogen, xenon, aluminium, radon.
Which full-frame mirrorless camera was first available in the market?
What is an office space?
Can you describe Gene expression?
What is social media?
Please provide a brief summary of Le Souvenir français.
What does the Obilic Medal commemorate?
Imagine you are the last person on Earth. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
Based on the reference text, what does the champion of the Masters Tournament receive?
Name some of the more renowned British Romantic poets.
Give me a list of things to enable a support team on their technical strengths
What is a Tommy John Surgery?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what are relevant dimensions influencing the skill with which they accomplish tasks, and the range of tasks at which they are capable?
How many points did Jaromír Jágr score in the 1995-1996 season?
Can you extract the different types of salts and sugars listed in the below text and show them as a bulleted list.
What is a Profit and loss account in finance?
Write me a poem about data
What is Lisp?
Extract all the place names from the paragraph. Different places should be separated by comma.
Why did the dinosaurs go extinct?
What could be a clean, inexpensive and efficient way of transportation?
What book won the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1990?
What are the best ways you can achieve type 2 fun?
Tell me whether these are mammas or reptiles: cats, dogs, monkeys, whales, turtles, lizards, crocodiles, snakes
Where are the best places to purchase fabric for your sewing projects?
Why practicing sport is important ?
How to lose weight fast?
Tell me which of these are great Irish Bands: The Hot House Flowers, The Waterboys,The Proclaimers, Deacon Blue, U2, Westlife,
What are some films produced by Takiko Mizunoe?
per the context given, how would illiterate politicians able to vote?
Identify the bird from the list: Not, Knot, Nought
What is a GIS?
Give me some ideas for my son's birthday party.
Which bears are the best bears?
how do you decide which job to take?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Thanos, Darkseid
What genus are beavers a part of?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Janggu, Chapman Stick
Given this paragraph about the demographics of Osaka, what was the highest number of residents ever recorded to be living in Osaka at any one point in time?
How many books did Dr Seuss write?
Which artist recorded the album Moonlight Madness?
When is the Indian Teachers day celebrated?
Why is the D silent in words like Bridge?
Should I pet the belly of a cat who is laying on its back?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Handchime, Nyatiti
Why f1 drivers earn so much
What year did The X-Files TV show debut?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rainstick, Tiple
Who are the members of the band Phish.
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Suggest 5 horror films to me
How long does it take to recover from a sinus infection?
Which parks are popular in London?
What is a balloon?
How many teaspoons are in a tablespoon?
Classify each of the following theme parks as Disney or Universal Studios: Magic Kingdom, Islands of Adventure, Epcot, Typhoon Lagoon, Volcano Bay
Can you provide a list of foods that are both high in protein and low in fat?
Which countries today were commonly part of the Fertile Crescent in history?
What is the New Administrative Capital of Egypt?
Which field hockey team has won the Stanley Cup twice in a row?
How many episodes in season one of "Game of Thrones" did Brian Kirk direct?
Is it a good situation to be a dev ?
Given this paragraph about Chinese cuisine, tell me what are the sub-cuisines, and what made them different.
What is Thomas Anderson's hacker name?
Summarize the plot synopsis of the movie Real Genius in 3 sentences.
Which fruits are often infused with a sweetener prior to drying?
Classify each of the following as a drink or food: coffee, apple, water, soda, banana, pineapple, champagne
From the given passage, write down some interesting points on butterflies
How do I keep a kitchen knife sharp?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Kent Nelson, Doctor Strange
Classify each country as being in the Caribbean or Mediterranean: Haiti, Cuba, Jamaica, Greece, Italy, France
How to be a human?
From the passage provided, extract the average size of a female great white shark.
What are the most common languages in the world?
What is the difference between a fruit and vegetable?
Do spotted hyenas actually laugh?
Extract a list of all of the communties and counties mentioned in this article about SH 115.
What is the current recommendation for a healthy diet?
When is the best time to visit the Jersey shore in New Jersey?
Give me a bulleted list of the fastest way to get from to cross the English Channel in a nonconventional way?
Classify each of the following as either a root vegetable or a fruit: cassava, ube, strawberry, carrot, potato, banana, blueberry, yam, lime
Give me a bulleted list of the seven more recent Indian Prime Ministers
how to use as wax
Which temple was the first female holocaust survivor ordained as a rabbi?
What are the key components of an MLOps pipeline?
Classify each of these car manufacturers as either Italian, German, American, Japanese, or other: Renault, Dodge, Opel, Ferrari, Lancia, Axiam, Nissan
Write a summary of the outdoor activities to do in Colorado
What’s the most over powered race in StarCraft 2?
What percentage of the world is left-handed?
How do fiber optic cables transmit data?
Create a checklist to move from a 3 bedroom apartment to a 5 bedroom home
Which land mammal has the best hearing?
What is the database?
Where is Malard
How large is the runway of the Richton-Perry County Airport?
Where is Cabernet Sauvignon grown?
When buying a whole fish, how do you pick a good fish?
What do the letters MG stand for on cars
Give me a list of popular DTC brands
Tell me a story about how the little kitten was rescued from a heater vent. The story should include how the kitten was bottle fed and only four days old with the umbilical cord still attached
What are the key signs of slow development for a 12-month infant?
Which two people are depicted by carved heads near the windows?
Give me a list of the best Dave Matthews Band songs of all time?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Wind machine, Langeleik
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Towers?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: White cockatoo, Pigeon
Which band sang No Sleep Till Brooklyn?
Can I have a lizard as a pet?
Give me a list of 10 nematode species
Who were the "Big Four" of Thrash Metal?
Write a story on humans on Mars.
Classify each of the following as part of the upper or lower body: arm, toe, finger, ankle, elbow, chin, chest, shin
What's the signifying traits of Neapolitan tailoring?
What is an experiment?
Extract the highest point in the city of Paris from this paragraph.
Why is cold water coming out of my water heater?
Classify the following as a mountain range, river or volcano: andes, sierra nevada, yangtze, brahmaputra, krakatoa, mt fuji, himalayas, atlas, lena, rhine, kilimanjaro, arkansas, ohio, vesuivus, mt st helens, caucusus
Extract some information about photograph The Last Joke from given text
Classify these dishes into the cuisines that they belong to.
Panipuri, Risotto, Butter Chicken, Lasagna, Naan, Ravioli, Jalebi
Tell me few brainstorming techniques
Based on this paragraph, who was Donald Trump's physician during 2018 to 2021?
Which of the following words are considered a palindrome, a word that can be spelled the same forwards and backward: deified, kayak, chicken, taco, wow, peep, noon, abba, lizard, bob, penguin, margarita, square
Provide me a list of some ways to get exercise that are fun
What is The Sixth Extinction (The X-Files)?
What are the top 2 most practiced religions in Singapore?
write a short essay on day spent in central park
Tell me whether or not these states are considered mountainous: Idaho, Vermont, Kansas, Hawaii, Florida, New Mexico, California, Rhode Island
What should I consider before taking a job with a lot of travel?
Let me know some different ways that someone can plan a trip
Provide some key points on Cardiac surgery from the given text
Write a press release for a startup called Outcomes.ai about their product "Luca" which offers a new SaaS offering for the subscription economy.
What is the largest city in Ecuador by population?
How many dwarf planets are there in our solar system. Describe each of them
Summarize why critics liked Kanye West’s album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy.
Who is Joe Biden?
How to write a college essay?
Tell me if these are baseball teams or football teams: Seattle Mariners, Chicago Cubs, Tampa Bay Devil Rays
What was Robert Metcalfe's impact on society?
Why has pickleball become so popular?
What is a flat white.
Which animals are a dog or cat?  a cocker spaniel, labrador, Persian, Maine Coone, and king Charles?
Who is Serhiy Malyi?
How deep is the Gulf of Mexico measured in Empire State buildings?
Which US state produces the most pineapples?
Extract the club that Corinthians defeated in the 2012 FIFA Club World Cup.
Who invented the first electric car?
Given this reference text, give me a list of all the schools attended by Tripp.
What was the Rolling Stones first no 1 hit
Can you summarize the responsibilities of a Chief Data Officer?
If you are stranded in the African bush, what’s the best way to stay alive  ?
What is the Premier League?
What is Spatial Analysis?
Without quoting directly from the text, give me a summary of the Voyager 1 space mission
What color is Lavendar?
What is an excavator?
What are the primary causes of climate change?
Write a story about somebody, anybody, nobody and everybody
what was the American Revolutionary War
From the passage provided, extract when hallmarking was first observed in England.
What is the largest spider?
Who is the youngest Stark child in Game of Thrones TV show?
Do you really need mobile phone?
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: RAM, FAW
What are the seven main islands of Canary Island as per the passage? Display the results in a comma separated format.
I plan a trip to Italy, what is the top 2 cities to visit?
How can the simple act of lifting weights a few times provide many benefits?
From the passage provided, extract the date when the iPhone was announced publicly for the first time.
what is use of cryogenics in virology ?
When did Maggie Wilson first appear on TV?
What train is the GB Class 2
What is the histroy behind electoral votes?
Where did Waldo E. Koop work?
Give me a bullet list of 6 different types of Christianity
What are the main characteristics of a Haiku poem?
Create a checklist of newborn essentials.
What awards does someone need to be an EGOT winner?
What are dividends?
Who was one of the best hip hop groups of the late 90s
List four uses of white vinegar outside of cooking recipes
Tell me whether each person is a basketball or hockey player: Lebron James, Steven Stamkos, Victor Hedman, Tyler Johnson, Kobe Bryant, Carmelo Anthony
Can you tell me about Tabarra?
What is the most popular wine varietal produced in California?
Is rule 606 good for the industry
How old is the world's oldest dog?
What is an option in finance?
What was revolutionary about the Barbie doll when it was first sold?
What is a list of knitting pattern abbreviations and their meanings?
What is Cuneiform?
TAP is the national airline of which country
Could a nuclear explosion change the Earth's rotation?
Which countries has Tamil as one of their official languages?
How do you make a beef brisket rub?
List the territories ceded by Turkey as part of the treaty of Lausanne.
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Rolls-Royce, Ford
What's special about Novy Urkarakh, the town in Russia?
Which famous musicians played a Fender Stratocaster?
What is the biggest strength of Hong Kong journalists
What is rain good for?
What makes a good woodworking bench?
How is the game "ultimate frisbee" different from "frisbee golf"?
What are some different types of used clothing stores?
What is Sunset?
What is Mexico?
What is the Summary of this page?
How long do you need to train before running a marathon?
Given this paragraph from Wikipedia, what was Alan Wolffe's primary research interest?
What is the name of the season that begins in the summer and ends in the winter?
Name reasons why it is important for young girls to play sports.
Are all types of salt the same?
Categorize these exercises as either upper body or lower body exercises: squat, bench press, strict press, deadlift, barbell row, dumbbell curls, pull-ups, chin-ups, leg extensions, leg curls, calve raises, wall sits, plank.
Who is the best football team in history?
What is the difference between a resume and a cv?
Decide the sentiment of the following user comments. Classify each of them as "Positive", "Neutral", "Mixed", or "Negative".

1. the latest update removed all the best features!! how could they do this to such a good app!!
2. There's not much to say; it checks emails, has a slick UI, and lets me focus on what I need to do.
3. It's pretty good.
4. The app's UI is amazing, but it doesn't seem to notify me consistently which really sucks. Not sure what's up with that but if they could get that working then it'd be amazing.
5. I can't believe how terrible this app is; it literally won't do anything I ask it to.
6. wow, im impressed
What year did the Calgary Flames win the Stanley Cup?
Given this plot summary from The Night Buffalo, what caused Manuel to discover these occurrences caused by his late friend?
Stevens Pass vs Whistler Blackcomb, which is better? Why?
How to survive Chicago winter?
Which of these are indoor and outdoor games: badminton, cricket, basketball, football, kho-kho, golf
Why do humans play sports?
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Bugatti, GMC, Dodge
Based on this paragraph, give me a summary of what a kidney donor chain is.
What's your favorite baseball team?
Classify these MLB teams as either National League or American League teams: New York Mets, St. Louis Cardinals, Los Angeles Dodgers, Arizona Diamondbacks, Tampa Bay Rays, New York Yankees, Houston Astros, Oakland A's
What are the words of House Oakheart?
What are some landlocked states?
When did the Great Chicago Fire occur?
Give me a list of the 10 most recent winners of the Men's Boat Race between Oxford and Cambridge.
Name some famous actors in the 1940's
Who is J.K.Rowling?
What is the sun made of?
Classify the following as either memoir, autobiography or biography: Einstein: The Life and Times by Ronald William Clark, The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank, Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant by Ulysses S. Grant, Confessions of a Bookseller by Shaun Bythell, Benjamin Franklin: An American Life by Walter Isaacson, H is for Hawk by Helen Macdonald, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin by Benjamin Franklin, Long Walk to Freedom by Nelson Mandela.
Given this paragraph on Macquarie University Real Tennis Club, please tell me how many tennis courts the club had.
What are financial instruments?
What are the majors in men's professional golf?
how does the water cycle work?
From the passage identify the places where Bacteria inhabits. Display the results in comma separated format.
Which letters denote Jesus Nazareth King of the Jews
How many moons orbit Jupiter and what are the names of the most significant ones?
How did Constantine die?
What is the Gun Show in New Zealand
Which of these terms are used in baseball and which are used in football: touchdown, home run, walk, first down, line drive, interception, strike out, offsides, holding, balk.
Tell me about cockney rhyming slang
Who was given the Booker Prize 2020?
Which author created Fu Manchu
Find the bird in this list: Aquatic warbler, Tiger, Shark
Why does it feel so hot in Houston?
Im going to the beach, which of these things should I avoid bringing?  Sunglasses, towel, beachball, kite, refrigerator, cooler, and portable chairs.
Identify the musical interval (e.g perfect fifth, major third) associated with the following pairs of notes: 
C-G 
G-B
E-A
C-Fsharp
Eflat-C
D-Csharp
B-F
How was the Iraqi embassy in Beirut destroyed?
Extract the countries that are named in the text separated by a comma.
Please write a socia media post about why Leo Messi is the best soccer player in the world.
Classify each as a ocean, sea, or lake: Pacific, Mediterranean, Erie, Atlantic, Dead Sea, Black, Michigan
Who starred as Rocky Balboa
How can technology be used to address challenges in the healthcare industry?
What are some songs from the Beatles' White Album that you'd recommend listening to?
Given this paragraph about the founding of Tesla, who was the chairman of the board of directors as of March 2004?
Which of Dany's dragons is the largest?
What is the best soccer club in history?
How did Jon Rahm win the Farmers Insurance Open?
Which is a species of fish? Noodlefish or Noodle
Tell me about Potrerillos
Which is a species of fish? Vendace or Venice
What cause did the Suffragettes advance?
What is the difference between mean, mode, and median?
Who is the Chinese Li Xueju
Which things are typically hot and which are cold: an icicle, a snowball, lava, a cat, tea, a meat locker, summer on the east coast of the United States, a sauna and a Bikram yoga.
Write a Shakespearean sonnet about calculus
Given a reference text about Shivaji, tell me when they were born, when they died, what their most notable accomplishment and what people called them post-death.
What are other names used for Good Friday?
Given this paragraph, explain who Robert Kiyosaki is?
How do I know it is the spring season?
Give me a brief about Manchester City
What are the words of House Caron?
What are the four major subregions in Central Otago?
Write a paragraph to convince someone to visit Porto Portugal.
Given a reference text about spaghetti, what shape is it, where did it originate, and are there any variations of it?
Classify each of the following as either a vegetarian option or not: chicken fried rice, green beans, strawberry banana smoothie, oatmeal, steak, scrambled eggs
Is it worth buying a multi-unit property as a first-time home buyer?
Why is Pickleball a popular sport?
Describe some different ways to stop your car from being stolen?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Megatherium, Sri Lankan Elephant
From the passage provided, extract the  population of Seattle metropolitan area
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Quagga, Beluga
From the passage provided, extract the names of elementary particles and arrange them in alphabetical order
From the passage note down the various streaming services which are supported by Alexa. List the results in comma separated format.
Which of these are woodworking handtools: plane, spokeshave, drill, table saw, chisel, bandsaw
Given this paragraph about Fyre Festival, would you say that it was a successful event?
Given the reference text below the eruption of Mount Vesuvius, how high was the mountain after the disaster?
Snow or Desert
Classify the following hikes in terms of difficulty: Half dome in Yosemite, Mt Everest in Nepal, Mission Peak in California
Which of the following animals are marine mammals: Human, Dog, Bonobos, Cat, Bats, Whale shark, Bears, Orangutans, Great white shark, Lion, Ocean sunfish, Koala, Cheetah, Beluga sturgeon, Orca, Gorillas, Camel, Hamsters, Lemurs, Blue whale, Chimpanzee
Provide a list of names for an inspiring exotic dancer
What is the difference between meiosis and mitosis
Imagine you are a mom. Write a talk track for convince your young son, who does not want to stop playing, to leave for school.
How is Tesla's approach to full autonomy is different from the other companies?
What are the words of House Tarly?
Why do firms advertise? Even when goods are interchangeable?
What does Lady Gaga affectionately call her fans?
Given a reference text about Britney Spears, tell me when they were born and why they are famous.
Given a reference text about James Henry Richards, tell me what sport he played, where he was born and where he died.
What is the most known picture from Dorothea Lange
Write a letter to your Mom and Dad asking whether or not I can study abroad during my Junior year in college.
Which of the following are companies that sell sports apparel? Nike, adidas, Energizer, Logitech, Dell, Saucony
Given a reference text about In the House, when was it originally on TV and what channel played it?
Is PM Modi is honest
Based on the following passage summarise how electricity became a driving force during the second industrial revolution.
Which state is named in the passage?
Classify these animals as either a reptile or an amphibian
Given this paragraph about heart, for how many deaths (in %) as of 2008 do cardiovascular diseases account for?
Given this paragraph, what is the recommended daily value of magnesium for women in the UK?
Tell me whether these are airplanes or boats : Cessna, Regal, Sunray, Learjet, Airbus, Jetski, Boeing, Cirrus, Mooney and Zodiac.
Can you make a list of some cities I could visit in Spain?
what are the benefits of reading to your children?
Name the popular children’s books by Roald Dahl.
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: pound, stone, kilogram
Who directed the most episodes of season five of Game of Thrones?
Why do the Dutch wear Orange?
Who created the tech company Apple?
Extract the names of the editors of Transportation Research Part D. Separate them with a comma.
Name the main crochet stitches
Given this paragraph about the 2011 NBA Finals, who won the championship and the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player award?
Given a reference text about Tom Brady, tell me when they were born and what they are famous for.
What college did David Gilhooly go to?
What does IHAC mean?
Who is Sergey or Sergiy Korsunsky
What are the benefits of working with a coach?
What are the words of House Swygert?
Why wasn't the Treaty of Versailles effective?
What is the best electrical system for RVs?
Where is Bogota located?
Extract who was Karl Lagerfeld
Which is the albino direwolf in Game of Thrones?
Which City in San Diego County is considered a great place to live and raise a family?
What is the best nightly skin care routine?
Jot down some points about University of Liverpool from given text
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Madal, Craviola
Which of the following are exercise equipment: bicycle, book, dumbbell, treadmill, spoon, television
Given a reference text about Pampaneira, tell me how many people live there, where it's located, and its elevation above sea level.
How can Bernoulli's principle be derived from Newton's second law of motion?
Please explain how a perpetrator's state of mind is relevant to guilt in committing a crime
Give step by step instructions on how to make a Long Island Ice Tea.
Provide a list of superpower you wish you had
Tell me some points about Foljk music using the given paragraph as a reference
What is the supreme law of the land?
Imagine you are an immortal being at the heat death of the universe.
I'm going camping and want to treat river water to drink. What are three options I can use?
How can I run Spark on a cluster?
What are 5 unique recipes for any kind of potatoes?
What is the difference between a research university and a liberal arts college?
How can I become more active and do more exercise?
Why are Mothers good at multi-tasking?
How would it feel to be the only person left alive in the US?
Which of these colors are primary colors: Red, Yellow, Blue, Orange, Green, Violet.
Which months have 30 days?
In what month did Jens Stub die?
Is 99% a good grade on an essay?
What is Visual Studio Code?
Classify each item as jewelry or clothing: ring, shirt, shorts, socks, necklace, bracelet
How long does it take to make Kombucha?
What is wasabi traditionally made from?
What are some popular tourist destination areas in Kenya?
Determine whether each of the following items is worn on somebody's head or feet: helmet, shoes, sandals, hat, socks, beanie, cleats
What are some good ways school kids can get started with chess in the San Francisco Bay Area?
What is a, "one-timer" in ice hockey?
Where is the Crucifixion with the Virgin and St John painting located now?
Explain the use of screens in basketball
What is Cricket in sports?
What is a vegan?
What is geostatistics?
From the passage provided, provide the two scenarios in bullet form where radiative heat transfer is an important consideration.
Prove pythagoras theorem.
From the below passage, list all the educational institutions which Gambo attended. Mention the starting year against each institute and sort in an ascending manner. Present in the result in the format ‘Institute Name - YYYY’ and display new line for each record.
How is "crisp" pronounced?
Tell me whether the following are "useful" or "not useful" when working remote: Internet connection, screaming babies, home office, second monitor, power outage
Which one is more popular? Soccer vs Basketball?
Will robots ever feel and think like humans? Will these robots solve all of our problems, or will they spell the end of the human race?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Black Widow, Black Canary
What is the capital of Australia and when was it founded?
Why to people lift their trucks?
Who is the all time leading passer in the NFL?
what is the best profession?
Which is a species of fish? Walu or Whitehead
From the passage provided, list the major APIs in Kafka. Separate them with a comma.
What is Grafana?
What is one of the main trigger for autism in current generation?
Why would someone want to ride a bike?
Why Maldives is so famous
Give me the top 5 burger places in Chicago
Name a winner of the Fields Medal in mathematics.
Why do humans like dogs?
What's unique about it and why is it famous?
Who owns ITV?
Is Mount Saint Helens still active?
Which is a bird or fish: Red-crested pochard, Redfish
Give me a list of the Mercury Prize winning albums, since 2000
What is the best hand in poker?
How do you calculate a golfer's handicap?
From the passage provided, extract the products & services owned by Meta. Separate them with a comma.
What are the three bands of Bay Miwok Native Americans associated with the area of Walnut Creek as per the passage. Display the results in a bulleted format.
Is golf an easy sport?
From the passage provided, extract the average altitude in miles that the ISS orbits at.
Give a list of possible reasons why couples would divorce
Based on this paragraph, what was Joe Biden's mother's maiden's name, what city was he born in, how many siblings did he have growing up, and what religion was he as a child?
How do you make the color green out of other colors?
From the paragraph provided, extract the year of the release of the album Origin of Symmetry.
When is the best time to go to Wallis and Futuna
Classify the following as being either being a type of shark or a type of bird:  hammerhead, eagle, tiger, sawtooth, blacktip, oriole, osprey, falcon, great white.
International Booker Prize 2021 was given to
Why was the show Seinfeld so popular?
Give me a list of top five tourist attractions to visit in Europe
What is the population density of Germany?
Describe Lie Algebra
Given a reference text about phrynobatrachus tokba, what are common names for it?
Give me a bulleted list of the cutest animals
Provide a short summary of Ian Leslie Campbell's first three books.
What is baseball?
What is an architecture diagram?
How many oceans in the world?
Based on this passage, how many miles did Gorbachev walk each week for his round trip commute to school?
What are some uses for a garden bucket with a hole in it?
What is it like to own a dog that sheds everywhere?
Given this paragraph about the JW Marriott building in Downtown Houston, what was the framing made of and how tall was it?
Classify each of these vehicles, based on whether they are two wheel vehicles, or four wheels vehicles: car, Gyrocar, van, motorbike, scooter, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), bicycle and Segway.
Suggest some TV shows I should watch in a few different genres.
When is the best time to visit San Francisco?
What phone carrier company did Sprint merge with?
Which of the following are typical ingredients that go into a banana split sundae: oranges, bananas, ice cream, banana bread, maraschino cherries, pickles, whipped cream, chopped nuts, chopped apples, moon shoes
Which of these are computer video games: Path of Exile; Playstation; Xbox; Nintendo; Starcraft; Civilization
Give me a list of Premier League winners in the last 5 years with corresponding points.
Did Billy Corgan really play all of the instruments on Smashing Pumpkin's 1993 album "Siamese Dream"?
Why didn’t people like the end of Game of Thrones?
Kindly provide some details regarding the plot of science fiction 'A Borrowed Man' from the given passage.
Which of the following US States border Canada and which do not: Montana, Wyoming, Michigan, New York, Maine, Idaho, and Minnesota?
Who is the greatest male tennis player of all time?
How do you subtract two numbers?
Who is the greatest musical theatre composer of all time?
Explain nuclear fission in the style of Jerry Seinfeld
Name at least four different types of freshwater waterways
How many feet are in 1 mile?
How do you make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich?
What flower does the Netherlands produce most?
What is the difference between the right and left side of the brain?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Western honey bee, European honey bee, Chinese honey bee, Japanese honey bee, Indian honey bee
Classify each of the following as either a classical or jazz artist
Classify each of the following as a professional golfer or professional football player: Jon Rahm, Patrick Mahomes, Tom Brady, Max Homa, Scottie Scheffler, Tiger Woods, Rory McIlroy, Josh Allen, Jacoby Brissett.
List the movies of Ranjit Mallick.
In India there are 14 Navratna  companies while Mini Navratnas are
What happens during Holy week in Mexico?
Why should I move to New York City?
What are some good body weight exercises for the lower body?
Who is George Lucas?
What are the components of a passive crossover?
What characteristics of the blue oak enable it to survive long periods of drought?
What is SAP?
What is the capital of Colorado?
List the members of the Ivy in reverse alphabetical order.
Where is Dutch spoken?
Which of these animals is not a bear: brown bear, black bear, polar bear, koala bear, panda bear.
What is the difference between a compact and economy-sized car?
Who is Lord Voldemort?
What is the significance of Glasgow, Georgia?
What are the 5 largest cities in the world by population? In this format "Country|Capital|Population" and include the header
Which are most valuable corporate brands in the world
I am planning a trip to Super Mario world and want to know which of the following characters are part of the Super Mario Bros franchise and which are from other games. Princess Peach, Luigi, Bowser, Link, Inkling Boy, Captain Falcon, Koopa Troopa, and Kirby.
Please provide a bulleted list of the movies Tessa Thompson performed in from this passage.
Name the Pandavas.
Would my landlord allow me to have my dog living at the house?
List top 5 people with most gold medals
What is the project management approach that have a serious of distinct steps?
Give me a list of 5 first date ideas
From the passage provided, extract which month is the coolest in Chennai
Does Bolivia have a wine scene?
What is the tallest building in Chicago?
Name China's greatest events happened when Jiang was in charge
Is there a secure desktop operating system I can use today?
What is the Make Something Edmonton Initiative?
List some steps I'll need to take in order to buy a car
Which is a species of fish? Bombay duck or Bombay Sapphire
Write some information in points on Kelvyn Park High School from the given passage.
Can I provide commercial software or services based on Spark?
Describe the benefits of riding the bus to work instead of driving a car.
Given this summary of The Eye of Heaven, what kind of ship did they find in the Arctic?
Tell me whether these are Mandalorians or Jedi: Yoda, Luke Skywalker, Bobba Fett, Din Djarin
How to win and make friends?
Give me a list of the best golf courses in America
Tell me which of these are brands of soap: Dove, Colgate, Palmolive, Ivory, Pearl Milling Co, Sofsoap, Dawn, Ethan
What game was the animated series Tank Knights Fortress based on?
Please tell me if the following cities are in Germany, Austria or Switzerland: Munich, Vienna, Zurich, Dortmund, Lucerne, Bern, Stuttgart, Klagenfurt, Salzburg, Bremen, Geneva, Innsbruck
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Chenda, Suroz
Why do people blink?
What is the difference between retinol and tretinoin?
Which part of the world Egypt is located?
What are some pro tips when cold calling?
What is the successor liability and can you give me some practical examples about it
Who is the greatest NFL running back of all time?
When does daylight savings start and end in Sydney?
What are Flos
From the passage find parts of plant which can be used as scion. Display the results in comma separated format.
What are some string instruments I could learn so that I can play in a group?
What would Bruce lee do if he is alive?
Write a paragraph on the difficulties of seizure detection among epilepsy patients.
What are main vegetables in V8 juice?
Name some popular American beer brands.
What are some sought-after boutique electric guitar builders?
Give me a list of the Western States in the United States of America.
How many press conferences does Daniel Keane give in the musical "Fermat's Last Tango"?
What does it mean if a database is ACID compliant?
What are the major innovations and scientific discoveries from UC Berkeley?
Should I buy a gravel bike or a down country mountain bike?
How many times did Barton switch parties?
Why is breaking up so hard to do?
Name the most famous detective books in the history
What are microservices?
What is the Fallout game?
List the churches serving Mayfield Park of East Bristol in a comma separated manner.
Based on the given text, what is the population growth rate of Afghanistan since 1979?
What is the holiday of Passover about?
Please explain why adding more indexes to a relational database is not always beneficial for speeding up workloads.
Write a story about a cat named Rory and the adventures he gets up to while his owner, Maria, is gone at work. Write the story in the form of an hourly journal from 7am to 7 pm written by Rory, and convey that Rory loves to sleep while Maria is gone.
How many episodes of the first season of Game of Thrones did Alan Taylor direct?
What is the difference between a corporate venture function and institutional venture firm?
Tell me what I should do in London, England.
What does the idiom burning your bridges mean?
Please give me a summary of the meaning of a derivative.
Give me some examples of Cockney Rhyming Slang and help me understand how it works.
Which of the following are nuts: pecan, hazelnut, butternut squash, walnut, peanut, corn nut, macadamia nut.
Is streaming better than cable?
What is AWS EMR?
What is the difference between a simile and a metaphor?
What are the four primary states of matter?  Answer in bullet point list, and capitalize each words
If I have a dollar, two nickels and a quarter, how much money in total do I have. Please respond with numbers and the dollar sign only, no words.
Please summarize “The Decision” that Lebron James has made based on the following paragraph.
Why do muscle twitch (or twinge)?
Why do people like to workout?
What is sake and how is it made?
Tell me whether these are mammals or reptiles: dog, crocodile, cat, lizard, snake, tiger, lion, turtle.
Which of the following cities are the capital of a province of the Netherlands: Emmen, Almere, Assen, Den Helder, Enschede, Terneuzen, Lelystad, Leeuwarden, Arnhem, Groningen, Maastricht, 's-Hertogenbosch, Haarlem, Zwolle, Bussum, Alkmaar, Hilversum, The Hague, Utrecht, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Middelburg, Amstelveen, Terneuzen
Who is Shigeru
Which is a bird or fish: Red-backed shrike, Red salmon
Will you say sorry to your kids?
Classify each of the following objects as either heavy or lightweight: bubble, aircraft, bear, mouse, bus, raisin, strawberry, popcorn, elephant, piano, plastic cup, train, butterfly, whale, refrigerator, feather, pencil, ship, tree, flower.
How long was the Titanic?
Five reasons to watch good doctor
What is Paris-Brest named after?
Given a reference text that provides the geographical description of continent Asia, how many Asian countries have a part of their land in Europe as well?
I'm sorting my fresh food into two groups. Which are fruits and which are vegetables? Apple, spinach, banana broccoli, potato, plum, pear, avocado and peach.
What is Aerial Yoga
List 10 best switch games of all time.
How did Kdramas become so popular?
Tell me about the Schoenbrunn Palace
With the rise of large language models, ChatGPT has changed the way many people work, and AI is getting more and more powerful. Will it eventually replace humans?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the principal fields of engineering
Please give me a list of popular street foods available in South Korea
Why do people like sports?
From the passage note down the various themes on which Harry Potter series is based upon. List the results in comma separated format.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Hightower?
What is Genetics?
What are the words of House Frey?
It really depends on where you will ride the bicycle, how often you will use it, if the bicycle be used for competing or pleasure and your body type. One more thing to consider will be the budget you want to invest for the bicycle.
Classify each of the following as "Can Fly" or "Can't Fly": Kite, bird, dog, plane, car, scooter
Tell me if these are brands or companies: Kleenex, Procter & Gamble, Cadillac, Doritos, Chase?
Given this paragraph about composer Arvo Pärt, tell me where and when he studied composition and with which teacher.
What are the words of House Royce?
Who is Mother Teresa?
Classify each of the following animal as a carnivore, omnivore or herbivore: tiger, bear, giraffe, wolverine, elephant, monkey
Give me a list of amazing noise cancelling headphones in 2023
Categorize each of the vehicles as a car, truck, or van: Tesla Model 3, Ford F150, Chevy Silverado, Toyota Sienna, Honda Odyssey, Toyota Tacoma, Dodge Dart
Who is Rihanna?
What is the Genomie Aggregation Databaise (genomAD)?
Where was the first publicly funded civil park?
From the text, provide me with the number of medals Michael Phelps won in the 2016 olympics. Separate them in bullet points by number of gold, silver and bronze medals won.
The girl was wearing a red dress whilst her friend was wearing a white dress. What colour dress was the girl wearing?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Horse, Red deer
Is it important to have friends?
Why are the Green Bay Packers called the Packers?
How should I pick a name for my baby?
How do I find the best interior decorator and best price?
Can you use logistic regression and linear regression methods interchangeably? If yes, in what scenarios?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Zither, Khlui
What’s the official language in Brazil?
Please describe what combat was like in World War I
What are some common types of snake plants?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Thylacosmilus, Swift Fox
What are the main reasons for the price of a good increasing or decreasing in a capitalist society.
What does BMW stand for?
Which is a species of fish? Velvetfish or Cotton
Give me a few different ways to reduce my household electricity bill.
What were Atari gaming consoles?
Classify the names of the Presidents based on their country.
Droupadi Murmu, Ram Nath Kovind, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Ranil Wickremesinghe
Classify which colors are shades or red or purple: Violet, burgundy, lavender, brick, lilac, plum, rust, orchid, maroon, ruby, cardinal, fire-engine
Give me a good french wine with cheese
What are the primary causes of inflation?
Who was the Italian dictator responsible for introducing fascism to Italy and joining the Axis in World War 2?
From given text, Please jot down some points about Richard D. Young
Provide few tips and techniques for Partner Ecosystem Enablement
Does Irina Korzhanenko still have her gold medal?
Based on the paragraph below, what are some key elements to consider in designing an OLTP system?
Who is the best soccer player of all time?
How to plan a Lakehouse migration journey?
What are some games you can play in the middle of nature and a bunch of people?
Given the current banking crisis we are experiencing, is this a redux of the 2008 crisis?
Classify the following as a 'triangle' or 'not a triangle' - equilateral, isosceles, right angled, circle, sphere, scalene, rectangle, square, trapezium.
Hindi Diwas is observed every year on which date?
List the Pixar movies that were nominated for Academy Awards but did not win.
What are the best superhero movies of 2022 ?
Marburg Virus Disease belongs to the same family as
Please extract the characteristics of a desert from this passage and list in bullet format.
From the following list, categorize the what country these dishes originate from: Tamales, Butter Chicken, Mac and Cheese, Pizza, Pozole, Nicoise Salad, Ramen, Trifle, Empanadas, Ceviche, Feijoda, Burrito, Jollaf Rice, Tagine, Couscous
Who was chairman of the board of directors of Tesla as of March 2004?
From the text below about the history of peanut butter, where can the first reference be traced from?
What is vanlife?
Which golf tournaments are considered majors in the PGA?
How many slices are in a large pizza?
Given this paragraph about magnesium, what is the element symbol of magnesium?
Are they communist countries: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo (Congo-Brazzaville), Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia (Czech Republic), Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini , Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar (formerly Burma), Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Palestine State, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Korea, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
What is the best watch in the world ?
Which US astronauts that landed on the moon were Scouts?
Which is a species of fish? Grass carp or Grass
What are crawfish and how do you eat them?
Why is Football a popular spectator sport?
What is K-Pop?
Summarize Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka in one sentence.
What is a zerbert?
Tell me about the Qingdao Qianwan Container Terminal
Given the reference text, what is log rotation in information technology?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Teague?
Is there a fictional book and tv show by the name Shantaram?
Who was the first president of the United States?
Why do people like to drink tea?
Who is Paul McIver
How is life like living on the pacific north west?
What is the best way to feel peaceful in your mind?
Classify the following numbers into natural, rational, irrational, integer, and complex: 

1, 0, -10, pi, e, root(25), I*pi, root(2), 6/7, 5/6
Who was the first actor to play the Joker on the Batman television series?
Identify the bird from the list: Bar-tailed godwit, Leopard, Shark
What is Merlot?
When did Arsenal first reach the first division? How many league titles did they win between 1989 and 2005 and how many FA cups? How many trophies in total for that period?
Summarise why lightweight rowing event was at risk in Olympics
What is a digital twin?
Name some TV shows that American actor David Duchovny has been in.
Why is Kanye sometimes regarded the GOAT (Greatest of All Time)?
Give me a list of some different summer holidays that occur in the United States
Give me some ideas of what to cook for dinner, I am vegetarian and I have picky children
Write me a thank you note for my high-school teacher
In what year was the Oakland Ski Club founded?
Why breakfast is so important for the day
Extract from the text the films that the actor Paul Harvey participated in. Separate them with a comma.
Why capri is so famous
Give me a list of ten Mayan ruins to visit in Central America.
Choose the word which is different from the rest: Cream, Oil, Butter, Curd, Cheese.
Is Pluto a planet ?
What are the names of the main islands of Hawaiʻi in alphabetical order?
Given this reference text about the career of Charles Henry Bromedge Caldwell, name the ships he commanded after his promotion to the rank of Commander.
What do these seven things have to do with each other: Lake, Ocean, River, Avalanche?
What type of terrain is a gravel bike used for?
What is Kefir?
Given a reference text about Our Common Future, what was the purpose of the report?
What is the biggest passenger airliner?
Who are the greatest hockey players of all time?
Given this paragraph about Michel Warschawski, tell me the two organizations that Warschawski led during his life.
Categorize  the below names into fishes and insects.
salmon, ant, bee, rohu, pike, wasp, beetle, carp, butterfly, cod, moth
Classify the below places based on the country they belong to.

New Jersey, New York, Kolkata, New Delhi, Ohio, Oklahoma
Based on this paragraph about Brazilian jiu-jitsu. which martial arts influenced Jiu-Jitsu.
What is a hardwired smoke detector?
how many strings guitar have?
how guitar projects sound?
what are different types of guitar?
Classify each of the following as a city, state, or country: Dallas, Bozeman, Kentucky, Ohio, USA, Canada
What is the difference between affect and effect?
Which author created Dick Tracy
From the passage provided, extract the net retention rate using the format: NRR {x%}

Product revenue of $555.3 million in the fourth quarter, representing 54% year-over-year growth
Remaining performance obligations of $3.7 billion, representing 38% year-over-year growth
7,828 total customers
Net revenue retention rate of 158%
330 customers with trailing 12-month product revenue greater than $1 million
Authorized a $2.0 billion stock repurchase program
How many episodes is Lost the TV series?
Which author wrote the ‘Winnie-the-Pooh’ books?
In Casablanca what is the name of the nightclub
What type of movie is Nope?
What are the five best sports cars to buy right now, under $200K USD?
What is a CRM?
Create a dialogue between two characters discussing the impact of social media on their lives. Your dialogue should explore both the positive and negative effects of social media on society.
Give me a list of important things to take on an international trip
Given this reference paragrah, who directed "The Man in the Saddle?"
What is an Exchange Traded Fund (ETF)
Where is the economic independence museum located
What is the main source of electricity generation in France?
Classify the following into animals and plants: dog, cat, tiger, roses, tulips, pencil, sofa
Provide me with a list of boy names that are currently popular.
Name three creative ways to utilize plastic wrap other than sealing food to keep it fresh.
What is the largest city in the world?
Please write a travel plan to Los Angeles.
From which countries is  the aurora borealis visible?
Classify the below devices based on the brand which manufactures them.
iPhone, iPad, MacBook, Pixel watch, Galaxy phone
What season is the best season to visit Chicago?
Given the reference text below, what is Air Jordan?
Is three body problem solved?
What sound was 'This Mortal Coil' known for?
Name some of the top soccer players
Which of the following countries are in Europe, and which are in the rest of the world: Nicaragua, Australia, Austria, New Zealand, Marocco, Spain, Greece, China, Chile?
What are some good techniques for cooking a steak?
Explain why Key West is a great location for a vacation.
Provide a short, bulleted summary of what historians consider the cause of the War of 1812
Which Roman general was conspired against and assassinated that is quoted "Et tu, Brute?"?
What is the difference between basketball and netball?
Are dogs carnivores or omnivores?
Which is a species of fish? Trout or Bear
How do I maintain friendships?
What is HTTP?
Why Santorini is Famous
Given this paragraph about Singapore, who was Singapore's first president?
What is freedom?
How many provinces contain the word ‘Holland’?
Tell me whether these states and provinces are in Canada or USA: Alabama, Ontario, British Columbia, South Dakota, Quebec, Minnesota, Wisconsin
What are some ideas for a birthday celebration for a 4 year-old boy?
Given the reference text about Mother Teresa's international charity, how many languages did Mother Teresa speak?
Write some important points regarding Family Justice Council using given text as a reference
What's the hardest mineral?
Based on the reference text, what colors do the Tampa Bay Rowdies wear and what stadium do they play in?
Which brands does Geely own?
Who is the best tennis player of all time?
Who is better : Superman or Batman?
Name some famous basketball players from the 1960's and 1970's
Classify each of the following countries as Middle Eastern or Central American: Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador
Is the capital city and the largest city of Chile same or different?
Extract when were the universities of Palencia and Salamanca established
Help me with spend a day in New Delhi. I like architecture, culture, and am a foodie
Can cars have odd number of wheels?
Given a reference text about Elk Grove, what state is it located in and about how many people live there?
What professional baseball team is based out of Seattle, WA.
Write a short story about a young aboriginal man seeking guidance on his place in the world.  Have him consult a wise elder, who will share wisdom and perspective.
What is a bicameral legislature?
Why is the sky blue?
How will Artificial Intelligence change the education industry in the future?
Write a short story about a person who discovers a hidden room in the library. The story should include a plot twist and a clear resolution at the end.
Why is Santa Fe New Mexico such a great place to live?
What kind of merchant ships would be useful in a modern naval conflict?
Which classical composer wrote the Hungarian Rhapsody
Classify each of the following people as an actor or athlete: Adam Sandler, Harry Kane, Hugo Lloris, Mike Myers, Tyreek Hill, Ryan Gosling, Joel Embiid
What is the most popular sport?
Are red roses typically considered an appropriate romantic gift?
From the passage mention the awards received by Sunil Manohar Gavaskar. Display the results in comma separated format.
Who are some of the best basketball players of all time?
Who was the first president of the United States of America?
What kind of magazine was Nova
How did the Royal Navy Protect the British Task Force from Argentine air attacks during the Falklands War?
Can kitesurfers sail up against the wind?
How many titles have Liverpool won?
What us foosball?
Is the person who invented bitcoin Japanese?
Name some of the bravolebrities from Married to Medicine
When you get a new dog, how to prepare the living space?
How many runs did Sachin score in the 2011 world cup?
What is the name of William Gibson's first comic book series?
What is a flat earther and is it possible for the world to be flat?
What are all the different names for COVID-19 and which one is the most recommended?
What wine varietal is the most popular produced in Oregon?
Which is a species of fish? Sardine or Sardinia
Given the passage about churches built in the village of Zijldijk in the Netherlands, when was the only running church built?
How do I get better at bouldering?
Write a rant about people that pour milk before cereal.
Where is the Black See?
How does a pine cone work?
7 factors led to nokia failure
Which of these sentences is correct: "If I was you, I would do it" or "If I were you, I would do it"?
Why do toddlers wake up so early?
Tell me a joke
Classify each of these car manufacturers as either French, German, American, Japanese, or other: Audi, Peugeot, Aston Martin, Ssangyong, Chevrolet, BMW
is daylight saving necessary at all?
What is Pickleball?
What are the words of House Penrose?
Give me a list of top five budget Android phone
Is the Jakobshorn in Davos worth a trip
Who are the main cast of It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia?
List three US states whose name begins with C. Then tell me the capital of the first one.
What is "Disko"?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Foote?
From which countries is  the aurora australis visible?
What is a narcissist?
Give me a list of different cat species that are good for people with allergies.
What is the best programming language?
Which institute is known as International money laundering watch dog?
What type of bike is suitable for children to learn: Balance Bike, Foldable bike, Mountain Bike, Road Bike
Tell me whether these foods are high or low in carbs: rice, spaghetti, chicken, pork, quinoa, salami
What human foods are toxic to dogs?
What is the difference between tennis shoes and sandals?
Tell me which of these things are used as rock climbing gear: lamps, guardrails, ropes, power cords, nuts, anchors, puppies, cams, belay devices.
What was the first country to guarantee freedom of worship
Is the language spoken in Kerala a palindrome?
What is a pot hole?
What's your favorite stars in the sky?
How do I decline an invitation to my Aunt's Birthday party?
Given this paragraph about rivers in Europe, tell me what are the two longest rivers in Europe.
Tell me about a Disk Manager
Which of these wind instruments are classified as Woodwind, and which are Brass: Clarinet, French Horn, Trombone, Bassoon, Sousaphone, Saxophone, Trumpet, and Flute.
Given this paragraph about muscle strains and that my symptoms include severe and acute pain with movement limitations, how bad is my strain?
Q: Does spraying people with disinfectant, or having people go through disinfectant tunnels, walkways, or chambers, lower the spread of COVID-19?
Is Hainanese chicken rice a national dish of Singapore or Malaysia?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Daredevil, Robin
I want to get in better shape.  I work at a desk all day, and I've never really been in good shape.  Growing up, I didn't play sports or spend a lot of time outdoors.  I know I need to improve my physical health, but I really don't know how to get started.  Can you recommend a workout routine for me?
What are the top 10 Hollywood movies liked by audiences
What are some good mystery/suspense novels?
Select the odd word from this list and explain why you chose it.
Cow
Horse
Tiger
Chicken
Pig
Name the top four benefits and drawbacks of playing Factorio.
Which of the following books were written by JK Rowling: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince, Cursed Child, Lord of the Rings trilogy, Percy Jackson, A Song of Ice and Fire.
How large is the Tennessee River?
What are the top three cloud providers.
Which one of these instruments are brass instruments? trombone, viola, trumpet, tuba, flute, clarinet, saxophone and piano.
Imagine you are a java expert and explain what OOPS means
From the passage, what awards did Shirley L. Fulton receive? List the awards using bullets with the year in which the award was given, in the form {year}: {award}
Why did the Allies invade Normandy during world war 2?
Given this reference paragraph about Roger Franklin Bonk where was he born?
How many members are in FATF ?
Please give a summary of the type of recordings Spalding made by year.
What are rare-earth materials
Pick a few months with 31 days.
Identify and briefly describe the four strategies employed by the leaders of the modern civil rights movement. If you were advising a group seeking to guarantee certain civil rights today (for example, disabled people, gays/lesbians, or immigrants) which would you advise them to use?
State if the below is a haiku?
"boiling hot lava
  bubbles beneath the earths crust
erupts sparkling fire"
Are fresh vegetable brought at a grocery store fresher than frozen vegetables?
From the passage identify the attributes of Dionysus. Display the results in a comma separated format.
When is tax day?
Give me three reasons why I can't attend Karen's party on Friday night as a bulleted list.
what is a competition?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Karyenda, Charango
A truck is stuck under a bridge with full load, what is the easiest and fastest way to unblock the road?
Given a reference text about Jeremiah Mutwalante Twa-Twa, when and where was he born?
Who wrote the TV show Fleabag?
Give a single-sentence explanation of this paragraph without quoting from the text.
What horsepower does a BMW 1250GS produce
Describe a camping plan with your family especially when you have young children
What is TSA?
What is the largest animal in the world
Where are the 4 best international travel destinations if you want a tropical location rich with history?
Polly, a 51-year-old female, visits your fitness facility. Polly has been told she has pre-diabetes. Explain to her what this means. What role can exercise play in reversing this?
Summarise the ways an employer can find workers using the given text as a reference
Explain me the characteristics of the Monalisa that make it a masterpiece
What is the smallest bird?
Write a bullet point list of at least 7 crops that are grown in California
Give me a bulleted list of colleges or universities located Massachusetts
Classify these vehicles by class. Mercedes A-Class, BMW M4, Toyota Camry, Ford F150, CyberTruck
In 1779 Abraham Darby built the worlds first what
Help me select what to wear for a beach party with my friends and what clothes to bring in my backpack so I can change for dinner. The weather will be hot during the day and cool at night. 

Here are my options: A winter coat, a bathing suit, sandals, a short sleeve button down shirt, a hat, sunglasses, underwear, socks, sneakers, a rain coat, a tuxedo, sweatpants, jeans, a tank top, a pair of khakis
What are the causes of population growth in the Sun Belt in the US?
Name a list of animals that you would expect to find on a farm.
Please fix the typos and grammar issues in the following text and reply with the updated text:

I wuld love to go te cynema but I dont like the corrent movies.
Why Bali is a perfect destination for a family holiday?
What years did World War II take place?
What properties are available to buy on a UK Monopoly board, not including stations and utilities?
Give me a list of three historical piano composers.
Classify the following Italian words as either a verb, a noun, or an adjective: andare, mangiare, buona, Alice, ristorante, veloce
What is SWIFT in banking?
What are the National League and American League in Major League Baseball?
From the text below, list the years that the White House Chief of Staff was removed from the United States Cabinet. Separate them with a comma.
What happens if the sky falls down?
Is Scala the best programming language?
What is a good Manhattan recipe?
Which of the following are convex functions: x^2, x square, 0, sin(x), e^x, sqrt(x), x^-0.5
From the passage list down the materials used to prepare boomerang. List the results in comma separated format.
Given this paragraph about hedgehogs, why are they different from porcupines?
What are some of most popular science fiction and fantasy books with TV or movie adaptations in the past twenty years?
In what industries is GIS indispensable?
What is a mortgage?
Why do some people prefer pickleball over tennis?
How many teams are in the MLB American League
What are the various ways by which one can stay active in the day to help fight obesity?
Extract the names of Serbian political parties mentioned in the text and put them into a bulleted list.
Please give me the list of airports that are owned by Australia Pacific Airports Corporation.
What is the effective interest rate (EIR)?
What is the largest state in the US?
Who named the Landscape Arch?
Who are some of the top goal scorers of all time for Manchester City?
What was the turning point in the Pacific Theatre in WW2?
Which of the following bodies of water are below sea level: Dead Sea, Lake Ontario, Sea of Galilee, the Hudson Bay, Lake Assal?
Given this paragraph about Nicaraguan nationality law, with which countries can Nicaraguan citizens obtain dual citizenship?
Give me a bulleted list of the distinctive physical characteristics of Beavers described in this passage.
Who is Charlie McCarthy
From this paragraph, find out who built the Panama Canal
Tell me whether these are mammals or amphibians: rats, cats, dogs,  frogs, toads, salamanders, newts, caecilians, deer, monkeys, apes, bats, whales, dolphins, and humans.
How can I compose electronic music in 3 simple ways ?
I love nature. What can I do in Boppard, Germany?
Beyond the classical states of matter, what are the modern states of matter?
I am looking for a new religion to convert to, what do you recommend?
What are the differences between an upright piano and a grand piano?
Tell me about the junk mail circle of life
What are the common toppings that can go on a hotdog?
What should I make for dinner tonight?
What is the best way to get your kid to become a better sleeper?
Classify each of the following as a flower or a tree: rose, tulip, oak, spruce, pine, orchid
How many vowels are in the word dinosaur?
What's the easiest way to make friends when traveling alone?
What are some good places to go on vacation?
List all the names of people in this paragraph.  Separate the names with commas.
What are some guidelines or rules for allowing a teen to use a mobile phone?
Where is Amazon rainforest located?
Which Shakespeare play inspired West Side Story?
According to the below, what is the Markov decision process?
which is the odd one out? Spoon, Pen, Knife, Fork
Given the reference text below, what is a GATR?
Where did Rosogolla or Rasgulla originate?
Who won the Stanley Cup in 1994?
Why do people travel to islands for a holiday?
Write a April Fools' joke for a data platform company
How can I make the paint color purple from primary colors?
What are the best vegetables for new gardeners to try growing?
Who is William B. Davis?
The United States has the most tornadoes of any country, nearly four times more than estimated in all of Europe then why does most death related to tornadoes occur in Bangladesh
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Goat, Reindeer
What is caffeine?
Complete this saying: The early birds get the ___"
What city in Ireland is the band U2 from?
Tell me whether these characters are from Harry Potter or Game of Thrones
Extract the factors that affect the shape of a yield curve, and list them using bullets.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Gehu, Venu
Give me the all-time hit movies of Rajnikanth.
I have a small ball, what games can I play?
Give me some ideas for different TV shows that I can recommend to my parents?
Given this paragraph about the climate in Fairmont, West Virginia, what was the coldest month in the city's history, and what was the average temperature during that month?
Can you please share some context on Figure skating using the passage given as a reference
Who is Ramona Singer?
What country was Frida Kahlo from and what career was she famous for?
What is the main difference between a nuclear bomb and a nuclear power generator?
Where is the best place in the Bahamas to go on holiday?
Where is Rihanna from?
Can I run MacOS on a Windows PC?
Why is the Pacific ocean typically cold off of the West Coast of the United States?
Retrieve the NFL teams Doug Peterson was affiliated with both as a player and coach in the text
How many regions make up the ITV network?
Give an example of places where astronauts are trained?
How many professions did John Dassow have
What side of the road do pedestrians walk on?
Why does the time of sunrise vary throughout the year?
Why german cars are best?
What kind of method is Transfer printing
How was the universe created?
Who wrote Vande Mataram poem?
Tell me whether each of these are green or blue: grass, water, leaf, sky, sapphire, kale
When will we go interplanetary?
From the passage list down the religious aspects of a funeral. List the results in comma separated format.
Classify each of the following as a band or sports team: Blink 182, Buffalo Bills, ACDC, Rolling Stones, Miami Dolphins, Boston Celtics
Which of these teams play in the National Rugby League (NRL) or the Australian Football League (AFL)? Sydney Swans, Penrith Panthers, South Sydney Rabbitohs, Brisbane Lions, Brisbane Broncos, Manly Sea Eagles & Fremantle Dockers
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sand blocks, Gadulka
Given this paragraph about a Civil Rights Leader, tell me when they were born, their occupation, and a famous accomplishment.
Who painted the ‘Girl with the Pearl Earring’ and the ‘Milkmaid’?
Classify the following based on the category of signals they use.
radio waves, television waves, sound waves, Computers, Digital Phones, Digital pens
How can I learn to code?
Who is Solveig Margrete Fiske
Who is Ruth Bader Ginsburg?
Where did the battle of the buldge take place?
In which movie or plot the character vedimuthu was established
What is a lakehouse?
Name the famous place in Italy which was flooded for the 6th time in the last 1200 years.
What did Allen Iverson mean when he said: "We talking about practice"?
Tell me whether each of these sports is in the winter or summer olympics: track, skiing, snowboarding, curling, golf, soccer
What is the best part of staying in a vacation rental on the lake?
how would you start explaining mathematics to kids?
What are some good items to keep in your pantry if you want to cook Asian food?
Which is a species of fish? Oscar or Papa
Given this paragraph about the human brain, how does my brain know that I'm touching something hot?
How did Uzunkum become a lovely sandy-beach park in Turkey?
How do you charge a phone
What is Halt and Catch Fire about?
Extract the symptoms of an asthma attack from this passage in a bulleted list.
What are some of the best vegan protein sources?
Where is Galapogas Island located? What is the area of Galapogas? How many islands are there in total? When was the first island formed? What are few Volcanos in Galapogas?
What are some ways by which humanity could quickly work to cool down the planet to minimize the effects of global warming?
Which was the longest Wimbledon men's final?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Namibia or Yemen.
Sanaa, Ta‘izz, Windhoek, Rundu, Oshakati, Al Ḩudaydah
Given this paragraph, what are the two Kingdoms that used Bangkok as their capital city.
What teams currently play in the English Premier League?
Which US state produces the most wine?
What was most important invention by Humans?
What are the typical ingredient for Italian tomato sauce
What is data denormalization in data warehouse?
Does extended screen time cause speech delay in children?
Why would someone want to drink sparkling water instead of flat?
Name the main characters of Feluda series by Satyajit Ray.
Give me a list of the 10 most recent NFL Super Bowl Winners
Given a reference text about the blood hammer phenomenon, tell me the background of the term "blood-hammer".
How to make a cup of spiced chai?
Why are pools fun?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Ceratopsian, Sunda Tiger
What are some examples of fruit that are not common in American grocery stores?
Categorize each of these as either liquids or solids.
How can I choose a favorite professional basketball team?
Give me ideas on how to gain trust in workplace.
What were Ansel Adams key achievements?
Is Apple better than Samsung?
What is the difference between worker bees and drone bees, and are there any other types of bees?
What is the Big 10 conference?
Given a reference text about the rock band Pink Floy: What was the name of Pink Floyd's last album and when was it released?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Handbell, Dobro
What sport did Tim Horton play?
What are the only two countries in South America that do not touch Brazil?
How is chocolate made?
Is Bullimore a first name?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pahu, Morin khuur
Which Russian author to read first?
What is a sonnet?
What high school did Paul Allen and Bill Gates attend?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kemanek, Buzuq
Given a reference text about the Victoria Inn, who built it and when was it sold?
Which of the following historical figures are known for their contribution to music: Mozart, George Washington, Vincent Van Gogh, Golda Meir, and Billy Holiday?
What are all the different ways of saying customer lifetime value?
From the passage provided, extract all the accessories provided with the Advanced Video System
During which event, Korea was separated into 2 nations?
Given this paragraph about Arlington, Virginia, what are the 3 public high schools in Arlington?
Are there more wheels or doors in New York City?
Which of Dany's dragons dies first?
Name 10 European cities
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pandeiro, Kudlung
What was Nicola Yoon's first published novel?
Classify each of the following as human or animal: lion, monkey, zebra, clint eastwood, cat
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Procoptodon, Polar Bear
Top 5 movies that I would love to watch over and over again
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Banshee, Silver Banshee
What percentage of the world's population did the British Empire hold sway over?
Tell me whether these items would be found under the hood of a car or inside a human: engine, transmission, heart, lungs, battery, alternator, blood, wiper fluid, engine oil, kidneys.
here is some text about Grand-Lahou Department, What year did Grand-Lahou become part of Lagunes District?
Classify each of the following as either a true statement or a false statement: 
1. Albert Einstein was a Chinese mathematician that lived in the 19th and 20th century.
2. Pigs are not mammals.
3. This question contains four statements that need classification.
Tell me about the RMS Adriatic
Why do so many people say it is special to be a grandparent?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Yemen or Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Al Ḩudaydah, Ta‘izz, Basseterre, Sanaa
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Madhalam, Erhu
What are Canada’s three largest metropolitan areas?
What are the top five things to do on a weekend trip to New York City in the winter?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Trigger, Muzzle, Pallete, Barrel, Bullet
Is green tea good for health ?
Classify each of the following as either a city or food: Edinburgh, Madrid, pasta, jam, Berlin, soup
Tell me which of these cities are located in Latvia
What are things to look out for when buying an old house in New England?
Which drum kit should I buy?
Name some of the well-known supervillains of Marvel Comics as per the passage.
Why do people get married?
Based on the theme of Prometheus movie, who are engineers?
Categorize the days of the week based on their starting alphabet.
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday
In the anime Saint Seiya, who of the following characters is not the core 5 of the Bronze Saint Cloth: Pegasus Seiya, Dragon Shiryu, Cygnus Hyoga, Andromeda Shun, Phoenix Ikki, Aries Mu, Gemini Saga, Virgo Shaka
How do you make a Gin Martini?
Classify each of the following as water-soluble vitamins and fat-soluble vitamins and which food come under them?
Give me some examples sedimentary rocks.
What is the best seasoning for ribeye steak that will be grilled?
what's a scenario in which you see lots of value for CDC ?
What public health inventions did Louis Pasteur contribute to society?
How long does it typically take a battery storage power station to transition to full power from standby?
Ideas to keep kids occupied for Spring break?
What type of persimmon can be eaten raw?
Give me a list of the major food allergens I should be aware of when cooking.
What makes bread rise?
What medicine is inside of an EpiPen?
What is the motto of the United States Marine Corps?
What is the oldest ballpark in Major League Baseball?
Who directed the movie The House of Flowers: The Movie?
How can I lower my utility bills?
What is Uście Gorlickie?
Who is Gavin Newsom?
Imagine you're seeing colors for the first time. Explain what you see and how you feel.
What is the difference between NAFTA and NATO?
Can AI destroy the world or humans?
What is a coded application?
Whats the difference between a CPU and RAM?
Why do Americans feel so strongly about gun control?
What was the derogatory term "toasters" used for in the 2003 series Battlestar Galactica?
Should I buy a convertible?
In the series, A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Arryn?
What is a bank?
Is a golden doodle a good pet for a family with young children?
What is Free Cash Flow (FCF)?
What is a Flat Earth Society
What are some good uses for duct tape
What's the name of the law that gives the trend for performance improvement over time for single core CPU
What are a lot of different options for traveling across New York City?
Who is Daniel Ricciardo?
Tell me which Pokemon are flying or not flying: Pidgeot, Fearow, Charizard, Ditto, Eevee, Chansey
When was Kyoto the capital of Japan?
Extract the names of the teams Michael Schumacher was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What are the different names of Passover and what are the meanings?
Write a review of Amor Towles's book, A Gentleman in Moscow
what are some things you can do on a snowy day
What is interesting about the play Polish Bethlehem?
Danny Kaye Humanitarian Award 2019, was given to?
Extract the names of universities from this paragraph and separate them by semicolons (;).
Given a reference text about Charles Wing Krafft, tell me where he was born and his occupation.
What was Nikola Poplašen's profession?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Bulwer?
Extract the amounts of federal funding provided to state and local governments for education in the past year
What is PHP?
Given this short paragraph about the L-21 submarine, what was an example of an improvement made compared to earlier versions?
What are equity securities?
Which of the following are considered to be baked goods? A cake, a pie, chicken fingers, scone, and a scoop of ice cream
According to the passage, mention the accolades that Taylor Swift has (in a phased manner).
What is the Mayan Civilization known for?
What is Indian national anthem?
What is First-stage boot loader
What is the most popular breed of dog in the US?
When did Videotron withdraw from the Cable Television Standards Council (CTSC)?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Hang, Ruan
What are the benefits of living in Australia
Who went to space first?
What is the best English food?
Given this paragraph about the longest living person, what was their name and when were they born?
Classify each of the Super Bowl winners from the oldest to the most recent (first win): New England Patriots, Philadelphia Eagles, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, St Louis and NY Giants.
What hindi song was used during the credits for the 2006 movie, 'Inside Man', starring Denzel Washington ?
From the passage provided, extract the name of the arm of Milky way Galaxy on which our solar system is located
Name three Italian Football Teams in Serie A.
Classify each of the following as either pasta or bread: casarecce, gnocco fritto, gnocchi, focaccia, grissini, ciabatta, tonnarelli, orecchiette, conchiglie, piadina
Was Richard Nixon born in California?
Given the reference text about Karl Marx, tell me when he died, what subjects he studied and at which universities he studied.
Write a brief poem about cultures
Given the following paragraph about the nutrition profile of peanut butter, what minerals is peanut butter rich in?
What is a bank run?
Explain Anthropocene to 13-year-old kid
What is the length of an Olympic size swimming pool?
My wife and I have two kids: one boy, age 4, and one girl, age 1. We are thinking of buying a pet. What are some good pet options for our family of four? Please include some advantages and disadvantages for each option.
Who invented the first safety razor in 1895
Give me a list of all the planets in our solar system.
Given this paragraph, what is the strongest part of the scapholunate ligament?
What is the best way to relax after work?
Given this paragraph, what is an important function of the London Assembly?
What was the result of the Emancipation Proclamation?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Biwa, Aulos
Classify these items as likely to be found in a bedroom vs likely to be found in a park: laptop, water glass, grass, trail, water, rocks, pillow, curtains.
Give me a bulleted list of the five most recent Italian prime ministers and tell me how many years they served as the prime minister
When was Telangana created?
Given this paragraph, what is the definition of Long short-term memory ?
What is an apartment building?
What are Marge's sisters named on the Simpsons
You should consider buying an electric bicycle, as it will help you driving long distance
What is a benefit of salsa dancing?
Is 95 degrees Fahrenheit considered to be hot weather?
Why do kids have to take tests in school?
what language is spoken in Brazil?
Where do eggs come from?
Who is Anatoly Kubatsky?
How long should a child's carseat remain rear facing?
Tell me whether these are alcoholic or non alcoholic drinks: sprite, mojito, beer, orange juice, water, manhattan, cranberry juice, milk
Who is Elizabeth Warren?
Give me a list of the stations on the Island Line of Hong Kong's MTR network
Give me a list of pizza restaurants in San Francisco
What is the Carolina Hall
What is the difference between a rose and a sunflower?
Give me a bulleted list of the last ten U.S. Open Golf Champions
What is a headlamp?
What is ECharts Java?
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most recent Chancellors of Federal Republic of Germany
Who opens episodes of The FBI Files with an introductory narration?
Given a reference text about GDPR, tell me how GDPR helps to secure personal data.
When was the internet created?
Give me a list of 5 key challenges faced by users moving from a Windows laptop to a Macbook
How many countries do the Netherlands share a land border with?
What is Freezing Rain?
When I ski, at the end of the turn, I'm not able to get good grip at the end of the turn and the tail washout, why does this happen?
Given this paragraph about a Tree well, why is it so dangerous for hikers, snowboarder, skiers and any snow practitioners
Why are Guyanese Creole words and phrases considered to be very elastic?
What's the difference between a wolf and a dog?
How many strings are on a guitar?
How do I get rid of mosquitos in my house?
Classify these as things you would want to wear for a rainy day or a very hot day: umbrella, ball cap, rain jacket, t-shirt, sunglasses, rain boots, flip-flops
When did Confinity become eBay ?
What is Google Sheets and how does it compatible with Microsoft Excel?
Explain how "work from home" has an opportunity cost. Provide anecdotes to support your points.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Timbal, Lotar
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Pelycosaurus, Hippopotamus
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Eritrea or Poland.
Warsaw, Łódź, Assab, Keren, Kraków, Asmara
How should I clean a stainless steel pan?
Are these things you would find in a jungle? Categorize them as Yes, Maybe and No Way:
Rivers
Fence
Trees
Iphones
Subway
Animals
Mosquitos
Wildfires
Mountains
Electric scooters
Flora
Crocodiles
Trump Tower
Fauna
write a short poem about gratitude to my sister friends who lead Obon dancing with me every year
Extract from the text who invented the Optophone.
Given this paragraph, what key crops were not available in Europe before the colonization of the New World?
Classify each of the following as flammable or non-flammable: coal, wood, newspaper, water, glass
Tell me whether each of these countries is an island or not: Iceland, New Zealand, Chad, Nepal, Cuba, Madagascar
Given this reference test, what is the daily recommended value of magnesium for men in the U.S.?
Please list all of Taylor Swift's albums, the year each one was released, and the genre of the album if it is mentioned, according to the paragraph I give.
How can you tell the difference between a dromedary and a camel?
Who is Géraldine Chauvet
Who is Gendry's father?
When sailing on a boat between 26ft and 40ft in San Francisco Bay, what items are 'required', 'useful', or 'neither'. A compass, laser printer, floatation devices for all passengers, fog horn, water, sun lotion, hat, fire extinguisher (one type B-2 or two type B-1), soft toys, tv,  visual distress signals, sunglasses, snacks, ford mustang, American Airlines
How many colors are there in a rainbow.
How is electricity recorded in ancient Egyptian texts as per the passage below.
How did the Titanic sink?
Some people describe braising as "transformative". Why is this so?
What was the first American college rowing club?
top mobile Brands
what causes leaves to change color in the fall season
What is Cabernet Sauvignon?
What do colleges consider as part of their admissions process?
What is backcountry skiing?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Xylorimba, Cimbalom
How does water freeze?
What was the cause of Michael Jackson's death?
Is the earth flat?
Classify each of the following as a planet or a satellite/moon of a planet in our solar system: Jupiter, Europa, Mars, Saturn, Titan, Callisto, Enceladus, Uranus
Write a creative writing prompt to give to students for an exam about creative non-fiction about nature.
Where is Seinäjoki City Hall?
Why was the show Curb Your Enthusiasm so popular?
Based on this paragraph about a singer, how many top-ten singles has Rihanna had in the United States?
How do you live a life full of gratitude?
What is a Rhapsa scotosialis
Which state's capital is inaccessible by road?
In 1899 the Eastman company in the USA produced first what
When looking to purchase a bicycle, you need to understand a number of factors. These include the primary use of the bicycle being either for transportation or pleasure. When choosing a bicycle for transportation you want to factor in cost, weight and durability. When choosing a bicycle for pleasure, comfort is the main factor.
What is the meaning of life?
What are major rivers in Serbia
Why do people enjoy baseball?
What are the main components of Apache Kafka?
Why does pollution in Delhi increase during the months of Nov-Dec each year?
Which player has scored the most world cup goals?
Classify each of the following as either an indoor or an outdoor sport: soccer, table tennis, darts, snooker, cricket
Do god exists?
How popular were figs in ancient Rome?
Why do you think humans need pets?
Is Seattle a nice place to live?
Tell me whether these styles are related to facial hair or head hair: mohawk, buzz cut, goatee, soul patch, mustache, chin strap, bowl cut
Given the reference text below, tell me when did the Seattle Seahawks win the Super Bowl, who they played against in the final game, and what was the final score.
Which is a species of fish? Javelin or Discus
What type of natural disaster is known for occurring in San Francisco, California?
What is Bar Method?
Why do people visit the national parks?
name some famous rock songs in the 1970s
What is geospatial data?
Why does coconut water turn pink?
Are humans animals?
What are five different names I could pick for my new male dog?
What are some classic board games to play with the family?
What if a buff?
Who is Luke Skywalker's parents?
From these paragraphs, give me a list of Southeast Asian regions that decolonised after World War II.
Who is the lead singer of the band elbow?
Which major countries border Mongolia?
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Aion, Cadillac
What age should babies be potty trained?
Give me a bulleted list of Aaron Fenster's accomplishments.
Who was Charles Stuart, Duke of Cambridge
From the passage identify the symbols of Demeter. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Which actor is common to Magnificent 7 and Dirty Dozen
Given this paragraph about Berwick, what was its population during the most up to date census?
The Awards ceremony for 63rd Grammy Awards was held at which place?
What is multipass distillation?
When was The Palpable Leprosy of Pollution released?
What is EFTPOS?
Why is Mediterranean diet considered the healthiest?
What is Penguin Books?
How did Abraham Lincoln die?
What does the Remarkable writing tablet do?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Tikataalik, Tree Kangaroo
Why is Utah a top destination for skiing
Where is Lukaya River?
Who is the greater footballer of all time?
How many times Daniel Ricciardo won the F1 championship ?
Who create Ben & Jerry's icecream?
What are three different club teams Cristiano Ronaldo has played for?
What is Multicloud?
From the passage note down the Well-known international brands of Germany. List the results in comma separated format.
What are the three best rapid transit systems in California and why?
Name some famous Sci-Fi movies
Who is the antagonist on The X-Files?
Give me some quotes from Aristotle that I might use in a school assignment
Who won the best new artist as well as award for the Best Pop Vocal Album in 64th Annual Grammy Awards
What's so special about the Nissan GT-R?
Tell me why people like the Skate video game series in one sentence
Which of the following are names typically given to girls, typically given to boys, or names that could easily be given to either a boy or a girl: Sam, Bill, Liz, Tracy, Mary, Joe, Taylor, Missy, Ralph, Scott, Michelle, Michael, Frank, Cheryl, Ryan, Stephenie.
From the passage provided extract names of countries where Anatrachyntis badia lives and place them in a bullet list.
How much gross earnings did Avatar make on its opening day?
From the passage provided, extract major material composition of Jupiter
Tell me if these technologies would have existed before the invention of electricity or not: steam engine, candles, iPad, radio, oil lamps, fax machine, printing press
List of greek goddesses starting by 'L':
What is Delphi?
What is s3 equivalent in GCP?
What are a couple date night ideas?
What are the key elements to a companies income statement?
Based on the reference text, who were the main parties who supported and opposed Prop 22?
What is an Oxford comma and why do editors have such strong feelings about their use?
What is the east Asian process of training small trees called?
Given the following paragraph, what university has evidence of teaching as early as 1096?
What are the different swimming styles? Which one is the fastest and which one the slowest?
Why do eucalyptus trees have such an excellent aroma?  Is there any other uses for Eucalyptus?
What is the tallest building in the city of San Francisco?
Given a reference text about Reginaldo de França Lopes, tell me what sport and position he played and when he retired.
Which cities should a perfect trip to Germany include.
What is the Norwood scale used for?
why does daylight savings still exist in the United States?
What is India’s rank in UN Human Development Index 2021?
What are some of the differences between English and Mandarin Chinese languages?
what are the benefits of swimming?
Extract the population for Paris mentioned in the paragraph
What is Airsoft ?
From the passage provided, extract supported consumers for Spark streaming. Separate them with a comma.
What are some reasons not to live in far northern locations?
Which of the achievements listed in the below passage would be considered the best example of an "outlier" for a single NBA game?
Name all of the field positions in baseball in a bulleted list.
Given this paragraph about computers, what is the first RISC system?
Tell me if these are types of rock or types of fungi: sedimentary, yeasts, mildews, metamorphic, igneous, smuts, rusts, molds.
What are a some nicknames for the name William?
What would it be like to be a pirate?
What is heterosis?
Summarize the following Wikipedia entry in three sentences.
Given this reference text, tell me what the foundational BJJ concept was
Give me a list of items I should bring to the beach this weekend.
What is success
Who is the main character of Naruto?
Who is the winner of International Booker Prize 2022 ?
Who is Jon Snow's biological parents?
Which one of these do not belong to the group:  House, Cottage, School, Palace, Hut
What colors are on the United States of America flag?
Give me a list of some underrated countries I've never travelled to.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Chrotta, Frula
What is a mobile phone?
What is the name of the world's oldest city?
Where did the 1951 French legislative election take place
Classify each of the following as a liquid or solid: water, mailbox, soda, coffee, bush, grass, milk
Who are some of the most famous weird fiction authors, who wrote in the early 20th century, aside from H. P. Lovecraft? And what is a good short story from each that I might like, if I like H. P. Lovecraft?
Think of a number of different ways you can get around Sydney.
What international trophy did the Club Africain football team won in 1971 ?
List five titles by Ann M. Martin.
Where is Urumqi?
What university did Ted Ringwood join and what discipline did he follow ?
What are the official languages of Belgium?
Describe the quantitative easing in 3 bullet points or less.
Was Endless Nights released in November or December?
The reduction in wild grain populations lead to what type of crop being cultivated?
What are some tips for traveling with a toddler?
How long is a running ultra?
Which country is the best at hockey?
Mention the Record labels Taylor was associated with.
What is the best movie of all time
What car manufacturers were associated with American Muscle cars in the 1960s and 1970s?
How does a transistor amplify a signal?
Given this series of navigation instructions, determine whether one would end up back at the starting point: Take 1 step. Take 2 steps. Take 3 steps. Turn around. Take 6 steps. Turn right.
Why the certain animals called the big five ?
"The Day the Music Died" refers to the tragic deaths of which artists?
describe the important event of Dravid's life in chronological order
Tell me which of the following are MLB teams: A's, Washing Machines, Ringed Tails, Giants, Yankees, Astros, Phillies, Cherries, Wild.
Could you please help classify these cars as "compact" vs. "midsized"?
Toyota Camry, Nissan Altima, Honda Civic, Mazda3, Honda Accord, Toyota Corolla, Toyota Prius, Hyundai Sonata
Was there an industrial revolution during the middle ages?
What is the difference between a microservice and an API?
Suppose you started at 0 degrees N, 0 degrees E on the earth. You started traveling due north, continuing straight for 2439 miles, turned 60 degrees counter-clockwise, traveled another 4878 miles, turned 60 degrees counter-clockwise traveled another 4878 miles, turned 60 degrees once again, and traveled another 4878 miles. At this point where would you be? Please explain the mathematics of how you came to your conclusion.
Which of the following words are conjunctions, and which are prepositions: and, between, but, for, in, of, on, or, under, yet
name some popular songs from the 1970's
Please extract the names of the 1990s films Adam Sandler was in separating them with commas.
Classify the cities as cities from 'India' or the 'US': Bangalore, Portland, Chicago, Hyderabad, Chennai, Little Rock, NYC, Pune, Gandhinagar, Champaign, Urbana.
What is the difference between men's and women's lacrosse
Classify each of the following as either a state or a city: Los Angeles, California, Houston, Texas, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Little Rock, Arkansas
Find what was the population of Indus Valley Civilization from this paragraph
What is family time?
When did the Portuguese royal family move to Brazil?
Classify the following into countries and cities:India, Mumbai, USA, Seattle, Germany, Berlin, United Kingdom, Australia, Tokyo, Sao Paulo
What is the best way to build relationships?
Extract the names of the groups of islands located on the Azores plateau from the text. Separate them with a comma.
I want to take a skiing vacation.  Which of the following countries would be suitable for doing this: Switzerland, Cyprus, Kiribati, the United States, Haiti.
Think up ways to clean a keyboard.
Who is Jon Bon Jovi
Categorize the following as do's and don'ts when opening a new bank account:
research bank options
find the cheapest option
know what kinds of accounts they offer
know interest rates
understand discounts
open as many accounts as you can
talk to an advisor
go by hearsay
What helped Argentina win the World Cup, considering they were not the strongest team on paper?
What should you do when your rock climbing partner calls out "On Belay?"
Did David Petrarca direct any episodes in the second season of Game of Thrones?
What are the most popular tropical travel destinations for people on the east coast of the United States?
What are the primary causes of obesity?
Give me a bulleted list with 5 reasons why is Lyft's stock is underperforming Uber's.
What is game theory?
How many total soldiers sustained non-fatal injuries during WWI?
I want to develop OKRs for my team at work. What process should I use?
Given a reference text about the history of the workweek, what social forces precipitated the creation of a five-day workweek in the United States and when?
When driving a car, categorize the following as either "increasing safety" or "decreasing safety": Wearing Seatbelt, Drinking Alcohol, Texting, Aligning Mirrors, Airbags
who is Matt Giraud
What are the world's most popular sports?
Write a creative ending scene for a thriller movie
Give this paragraph about TCP/IP, what are the four abstraction laters?
is Lakeview replacing dashboard
List the years in which the various seasons of You broadcasted as per the given passage. Use the format ‘season #no : Year’ in a bulleted list
What is the meaning of RCA in software
List the television programs that Don Carlos Dunaway has worked on in alphabetical order.
Write a short story about an inn staffed by bears, birds, and sea creatures. The story should include details about the staff and the activities that the inn offers.
What is AWS EKS?
Describe a plan to progressively ski harder trails. Recommend a ski resort in Tahoe including trails that I can use to follow the plan.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Carolina Parakeet, Orangutan
Write a point of view on personal privacy in the age of software and technology.
Please give me a summary of the text on the origins of skateboarding.
Given this paragraph, tell me the storyline of Sabapathy.
Tell me about orienteering
Did Trump lose the 2020 presidential election?
What should I get for my friends who love to cook?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Sketch, Diagram, Poster, Chart, Paper
Given this series of navigation instructions, determine whether one would end up back at the starting point: Walk south 5 miles. Walk east 5 miles. Walk north 5 miles.
What is a PFD?
Given this reference text that describes the importance of tigers in chinese culture, what do they symbolize in modern China and what types were common in the northeast?
What's a good approach to learning a foreign language?
Where was the 2nd edition of Indian and Bangladesh Navies held?
What is an onigiri made of?
What is special about the number 1729?
When was the newest country created?
What is deafblindness
What are the colors of the sky during a sunset?
What is the difference between a donut and a scone?
How many people initially formed the band Raeth?
Brainstorm a list of 9 different dishes for a Thanksgiving meal
Classify the following as either muscle car or minivan: Odyssey, Mustang, Sienna, Camero, Challenger
What is the official language in Brazil?
You are getting ready for your soccer game and look into your soccer bag. Which of the following items are part of your soccer equipment: cleats, boots, tights, jersey, swimsuit, milk, carrots, water, shin guards, socks, folder, racket, glove
Why is the sky blue?
Alfred Jingle appears in which Dickens novel
What sacrifices did Ons's parents make to help her tennis career?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Lirone, Fife
Give me a bulleted list of the top five most followed people on instagram.
Why is football/soccer such a popular sport?
I'm going to give you a passage from Marty Essen's book "Cool Creatures, Hot Planet: Exploring the Seven Continents" and want you to answer the following question: Where are western Hermann's tortoises found?

After spending the night at a large chain hotel, Deb and I traveled southeast with tortoises on our mind. Our plan for the day was to infiltrate the Massif des Maures area and search for one of France's most endangered reptiles-- the western Hermann's tortoise.  The first stop of our quest was Le Village de Tortues (the Tortoise Village), a tortoise rehabilitation center near the town of Gonfaron. Our mission was to befriend a staff member, learn as much as we could, and get detailed information on tracking down the wily Hermann's tortoise in the wild. When we couldn't find an English-speaking staff member, our mission was nearly thwarted. Only through quick thinking and improvisation were we able to acquire the vital background information we needed. Okay - we utilized the signs provided for British visitors. For many people, the word tortoise invokes thoughts of giant four-foot-long Galapagos tortoises. Western Hermann's tortoises, on the other hand, are small, reaching a maximum length of eight inches. While both reptiles make the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, the Galapagos tortoise is listed as "vulnerable" and the western Hermann's is listed as "endangered." In France, habitat destruction, egg pilfering, and fire are the primary factors for the tortoises decline.
What is EDM?
What is the FDIC?
Can you paint watercolor styled painting with acrylics?
Tell me whether these are countries or continents
Where is Salvador Brazil?
In which country did the M&NA railroad exist.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tifa, Pipa
Think up of a bunch of different dishes you could make with a pound of potatoes
Why are children so special?
How big is Reef manta rays
What causes the sun to rise?
List some characters from South Park.
Given the reference text about The Masters, where is the tournament played and what is the name of the golf course?
What is Kotlin?
Name some famous anime shows?
How can I save money when travelling?
Given the below reference text about Luftwaffe, tell me for how many years was this military organisation active officially in Germany?
What year was Genghis Khan born?
Give me a history of Valve
Best Tea in the World
Tell me whether these are College Football teams or NFL teams: Georgia, Giants, Chiefs, Panthers, Michigan, Texas Christian, Ohio State
How many coaches (full and part-time) from The Voice have won Grammys?
Identify the bird from the list: Elder, Eider, Either
What is the Philly Special and when was it used ?
Extract examples of electrical conduction from the following passage.
Give me a list of things to buy a 12 year old boy
what are the components of modern computers?
Which of these countries is in North America: Canada, China, or Poland
what would I need of the following for a hiking trip?
headphones
internet
trek shoes
winter gear
camp
water
food
car
towels
jeans
guitar
What is the difference between pursue and persuade?
Based on this paragraph, what was the name of Jesse LaFollette's mother?
Given this paragraph on the Persian language, which are the 2 sub groups of the Western Iranian language?
Based on the above passage mention the parts of Atlantic Ocean formed by Equatorial Counter Current. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Extract the names of persons and countries in two different lists separated by commas: "Sunday’s blast has echoes of the car bombing that killed Darya Dugina, the daughter of influential ultra-nationalist philosopher Alexander Dugan in August 2022. Alexander Dugan is credited with being the architect, or “spiritual guide,” to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Dugina and Tatarsky moved in the same circles, and they had been photographed multiple times together"
How many wheels does a bicycle have?
How old do you have to be to get your pilot's license in the United States.
Some families get rid of TVs and smartphones for the proper growth of children, but are those things desirable?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what is Instruction tuning?
Measured in feet, what was the length of the gun barrel produced by Philip Webley & Son of Birmingham discussed in the above passage?
What is this text about?
Tell me which of the following clubs are playing American football or soccer? Inter Milan, Juventus, Barcelona, New York Jets, Seattle Sounders, Seattle Seahawks, LA Galaxy.
What are isobars and what are they commonly used for?
What is a "love hotel"?
What does the "E" stand for in Chuck E. Cheese?
Write a diary entry about a mother discovering the greatness she sees growing in her middle-school aged daughter.  Contrast the kindness of the daughter against the difficulties the mother is experiencing at work that day.  Infuse the story with love and admiration.
How do you play baseball
What is Braising?
2022 UEFA European Under 19 Championship qualification
What is the benefit of having BDRS and SDRs?
Extract the list of countries that have part of the Amazon rainforest. Place them in a bullet list
Tell me which following countries are in Asia: United States, Canada, Britain, France, Australia, Korea, China, Egypt, Israel, Japan, Brazil
According to this paragraph, when was the university of virginia founded?
What is the difference between race and ethnicity?
What does a drilling engineer do?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Bandol, Soprano clarinet
Name some characters of One Piece Straw Hat Pirates.
What are some fun things to do with my 6 year old son
What are the top 5 best ways to prepare a burger?
Given a reference text about Konstantin Konstantinovich Sluchevsky, tell me where he was born and where he studied.
What is the best smartphone on the market?
Different ways in which you can eat noodles
Write one paragraph on the relevance of AI/ML in the field of Data Engineering
What are the words of House Graceford?
Name three professional sports teams in Boston.
From this passage, extract the names of Hawking's siblings, including both by birth and through adoption, and separate by bullets.
What was invented by Dr Albert Southwick in 1881
What is the plot of One-Punch Man?
how long do roasted coffee beans last before you should throw them out?
How can I tell my sourdough starter is ready to use?
How old is the largest living thing?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dhol, Torban
What are the most powerful server CPUs?
write a short essay on murals in jersey city
Tell me a romantic fact about animals.
Given this paragraph about the original church in Guston in 1892, what were the two ways that were used to announce the beginning of services?
Which NFL team has won the most Super Bowls?
What is the show "The X-Files" about?
Why practicing sport is important ?
What are Salesforce's Inc current state and challenges?
Based on this article, what is a potential weakness of traditional military camouflage?
Where is the post office of Shawboro located?
What do you mean trekking?
Give me a suggestion where I should go for spring break if I live in the United States.
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Joseph Martin, Ghost Rider
What does it take for a leader to notice & appreciate you in the organization
For what is known as Transphonologization?
What is YARN?
What is a CPT as it relates to Healthcare?
Tell me what are these visual charts appropriate for? 

Choropleth map, heatmap, scatter plot
Density plot, horizon chart, line chart,  Geographic heatmap , Bar chart
What does the term "tulip mania" mean?
What are the differences between Data Lakehouse vs Data Warehouse vs Data lake
What do you understand by Boosting in machine learning?
On a backcountry backpacking trip where we expect to cross waterways, categorize each of the following as either 'useful', 'not useful', 'dangerous' or 'neither'.  A chinchilla, a compass, granola, dry bag, seventeen oars, thermite, ten tons of uranium ore
Write a preface to book where the author feels the need to properly caveat his story about warfare in the middle east, in case someone were to get offended by the content.  Make sure the author conveys his deep respect for that region and all cultures represented therein.
Who wrote the song Happy Birthday Darlin
Please label which of the following appear in the game Clue as suspects, weapons, or rooms: Atrium, Billiard Room, Colonel Mustard, Conservatory, General Ketchup, Lead Pipe, Mrs. Peacock, Rope
Give me the list of Greek goddesses starting by 'B':
Is Blind a reliable source for information?
Who is the winner of International Booker Prize 2020?
What is the shape of the Earth?
What are pajamas?
How many data categorization impact levels does the Department of Defense define and provide authorizations for?
Extract from this article the most common Android security threats and simple descriptions of each threat, in a bullet pointed list.
What is the biggest flag in the world?
Classify these as having wheels or not having wheels: car, plane, boat, bicycle, drone, street, motorcycle
How should I plan my week as a working mom ?
Where is Babylon remain located?
What is fleece?
Which of the following are things you would commonly pack for a camping trip: freeze dried meals, sleeping bags, curling iron, lantern, axe, tent, high heels, hiking boots, mirrors, vintage trunk, antique lamp, swiss army knife
Write a description of your favorite place to visit in San Francisco and why you like it so much.
Extract the Ferrari automobiles that were introduced from 2020 onwards.  List them by year, and separate them with a comma.
What are the most common sorting algorithms?
How to skip rope?
What is black tie dress code?
Tell me whether these cities are in the United States or not: Dallas, Seattle, Mumbai, Ljubljana, Rochester
Why you should have a bucket list?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dhaa, Tremoloa
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bak, Fiddle
Who is the current king of the Netherlands
What are the 7 basic commands to train a puppy?
What Are the Gift Ideas for Anime Fans?
Summarize what GDP means as well as what it is and is not used for.
When was the Philippine House Committee elevated into a standing committee
Tell me whether these Pokemon are ice or rock types: Vulpix, Dewgong, Cloyster, Geodude, Golem, Onix
List the ten episode titles from the third season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Given the following paragraph, where was Omar ibn Said born?
Think up a bunch of different meals I can make that include potatoes.
What was the Fannie Patton steamboat
Classify each of the follow weapons used by the US Military as a Fighter Jet, Rifle, Attack Helicopter, or Tank: M4 Carbine, F16 Falcon, M1 Abrams, F15 Eagle, AH64 Apache, M1903 Springfield, AH1 Cobra, M4 Sherman, F14 Tomcat, F86 Sabre
What are the steps to care for a houseplant?
Who wrote the Lord of the Rings?
Is Slovenia a nice place to take a food fueled vacation?
Who is Michael Jackson and what is he famous for?
Can you suggest other house hold items that can be used instead of a hammer ?
From the passage provided, extract the month and year when Cassandra was released on Google code
is IT a great career
Give me a 4 word summary of Moby Dick, which rhymes.
What content is popular on Tictok?
Name some famous jazz songs?
What are the official official forms of written Norwegian?
People love cats but can be highly divided about what breed of cat is the best - What is your favorite, and why?
Extract the stages of technology evolution?Explain all of them in brief with examples.
What are some easy and tasty dinner recipes I can make tonight?
Is a blackberry a fruit or a berry?
How can I learn how to play volleyball?
How many years did the Pony Express mail delivery service last?
What are some Machine Learning Algorithms
How can I decide what bike I should get?
Extract the population of Teodorów from the following text.
Who started the Reformation?
Which dog would make the best pet?
Based on this paragraph from Wikipedia, where was Jerry Garcia born, how many fingers did he have, and where did he attend college?
What are the common symptoms of COVID-19?
Give me the most popular characters in DC Comics from this paragraph without summarizing.
What is Big Data?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ashiko, Anzad
When is the best time of day to exercise?
How to cook Filipino chicken adobo?
Based on this paragraph, what industry did Gardiner Hall create a business in and how was it impacted by the Civil War?
From the passage provided, extract when Bloomberg L.P. was founded
Given a reference text about Nicholas Theodore, tell me where he went to medical school and  what he is known for.
Give me a checklist of 5 items of furniture I should buy for my new living room
What is the best way to drink coffee?
What is the best lure color when fishing for blue Marlin on the Big Island
Extract the architectural details with respect to the Our Lady of the Rosary Cathedral in Colombia. Separate key items with a new line that begins with a hyphen.
Can I PLEASE get a dog?
Write a tribute to my high school swim coach.
What is the largest city in the United Kingdom?
From the given text, Provide me step by step instructions on how to prepare tea.
What are the reasons why quantum theory is considered do difficult to understand
Give me six story ideas for writing a children's book.
Provide a list of the best baseball players of all time
Why is ice hockey a good sport for women?
Who is David Oliver Siegmund
What was the first road trip after Elson joined Indiana University?
Given a reference text about IMDB, tell me how it rates movies.
Which MTV show featured Jenny McCarthy hosting a dating show?
Write down some important aspects regarding civil war from the given text
List five titles by Mary Shelley.
Kate's parents have three kids. The first kid's name is Peter, the second kid's name is Parker. What is the third kid's name?
Tell me whether these athletes play golf, soccer, or football: Tiger Woods, Lionel Messi, Lavonte David, Russell Wilson, Derek Carr, Rafael Leao, Tyler Adams, Dustin Johnson, Jordan Spieth
Why do you need family meeting frequently
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of Rita Moreno's greatest achievements.
What is the name of the famous park in New York City?
Write a shopping list for me and group the ingredients by type. I want to make stir-fried teriyaki tofu for dinner and I want enough ingredients to make a sauce, because I don't want to buy a bottle of sauce. This meal will serve four people.
Give me a list of the 8 best west coast oysters
Which of the following does not fit with the others on the list? Please explain your reasoning.
Galaxy M81
Black Eye Galaxy
Pinwheel Galaxy
Andromeda Galaxy
Sombrero Galaxy
In what year did Columbus reach the Americas?
Kamba Ramayanam was written by
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Wolly Mammoth, Poison Dart Frog
What is an Incorporation?
Who was crucified in the crucifixion painting
What are some of the most common vegetables in the broccoli family?
Which of the following were recurring characters on The Sopranos: Carmela, Tony, Christopher, Jody, Natasha, Silvio, Adriana, Tom & Jerry, Jerry Seinfeld, George Costanza
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Clegane?
Name some famous Sci-Fi books
Who is currently US president?
What does the Romantic Novelists' Association do?
What is the biggest company in the world in terms of market capitlization?
What example of a cancer could cause blood in the urine?
Which leaders claimed the English throne in 1066?
Given this paragraph about the Gusii language, what do they call sandals in Tabaka Kenya?
Who are the most famous cricket players of all time?
which is the famous vegetation food in south India?
Why is India Pale Ale (IPA) the best type of beer?
Tell me if the following were originally board or computer games: Scrabble, Monopoly, Doom, Counter Strike, Sorry, Super Mario Bros?
Who was the very first American Idol winner?
Given a reference text about True Corporation Public Company Limited, tell me what country it's in and how it was formed.
How does meditation help mental health
What can I do as a fun activity in Amsterdam this weekend?
What TV show featured the Halliwell sisters that found they were witches that needed to battle demons and the forces of darkness?
Make a poem about color and style
How do electric cars work?
What are some important things that have happened on the Day April 6?
Is caffeine good for mental health?
What is the most produced airplane in history.
Give me a list of the teenage mutant ninja turtles
Tell me if these animals are mammals or birds: Emu, Gorilla, Platypus, Kangaroo, Ostrich, Robin, Raven
Extract one of the franchise introduced in IPL 2022 from the text and who won the title during the previous session.
Which countries besides the five recognized Nuclear Weapons States have acquired, or are presumed to have acquired, nuclear weapons?
If it's called "free" climbing, why do climbers use gear to climb?
Make me a workout playlist for the gym
Where is Przystań?
When was the Australian city Canberra founded?
What are the ways to travel from Delhi to Varanasi? And how long does each route take?
Who is the greatest guitarist of all time?
What is an RSU?
Classify the following into nouns and verbs : dog, run ,cat, John, eat, swim, Adam, fly
What is the difference between bourbon and whiskey?
In the game of baseball, if a batter achieves three strikeouts in one game what is that called?
What is photosynthesis?
What is a dog better at than humans?
From the passage provided, extract list of language drivers for Cassandra. Separate them with a comma.
Was Dracula a real person?
Extract the names of the works of Michael Daugherty from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Extract the names of the television series Dixie Violet Egerickx starred in and the year those series were released. List them using bullets in the format {Series} - {Year}
Why is drinking coffee better before sport?
Which technology is best to learn for 2023 and the future?
What are the names of popular Alternative music bands from the 1980s and 1990s.
What is a hedge in finance?
Are these things typically yellow, green or red: the sun, a banana, blood, lettuce, a tomato, grass, peas, and a heart emoji.
What is Artisanal Mining?
What are the primary causes of inflation?
What are the best hikes near Portland Oregon.
Where does this company produce its products?
How do I know if I am in love?
What are the benefits of hot yoga?
What are the main ingredients for bread?
What Indian sport is like baseball?
Name some famous shows with Jennifer Anniston.
Give me a one line summary of the story below: 

A long long time ago the Queen of Odisha heard that there was a master stone sculptor who made such stunning statues of the gods that people would weep from happiness at the beauty of the statues if they saw them. One summer day, while resting indolently with the King in the main hall of the royal palace, the Queen suddenly had a thought. "How nice it would be, King, if we could build some beautiful statutes of Lord Jagannath so that the people can come worship Jagannath, Balabhadra, and Subadhra. What do you think?" 

The King thought for a few minutes, and then nodded in agreement. "What do you have in mind, my Queen?" And so, soon the stone sculptor was summoned to appear before the Court for an appointment to build in his way the statutes of the gods. Soon the monsoon season started and the sculptor appeared in front of the court, awaiting his appointment. He was a humble man from the mountainous regions of Odisha. Even at his best-dressed, one couldn't help but notice his rough hands, and the small sprinkling of dust that seemed ever present in his hair. 

The King and Queen graciously waited as the sculptor bowed and then asked "Your majesties, what can I do for you?" The Queen leaned forward in her throne and her voice rang out in the court "We have heard, o Master Sculptor, of your skills from people far and wide across the Kingdom. We dream of having you put your skills to use to build beautiful statues that will represent Lord Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balabhadra for our people to worship."

The sculptor was silent. As his silence extended, ministers of the court began to feel restless. "Speak up! How can you be silent when the Queen graces you so!" But still, the sculptor was silent. 

The King and Queen sat patiently in their thrones as they waited for the sculptor to respond. Perhaps the enormity of the task was too much. Perhaps, the sculptor was thinking of what he should ask for in return. Or even more, perhaps, the sculptor was awed and honored by the request. 

At last, as the shadows from the late afternoon sun began to stretch across the floors of the hall, the sculptor shifted his weight, and opened his mouth to speak. "Your majesties, you grace me with such a request, I cannot help but oblige. It is an honor." At this, the Queen sat as straight as a rod, listening for the words that would come next. "But, I can do this on one condition only. I will work in a closed hall, where none may enter - regardless of whether they can hear me working or otherwise. None may enter until I open the doors from within and proclaim to all that the statues are completed."

The ministers gasped - what a strange request from this man. Was he a fool? What if he just slept and ate and didn't do any work? How could the King and Queen trust that he would do the work he was promising to do? The Queen looked on thoughtfully. She glanced at the King, and it seemed to her that he agreed on this condition without reservation. She looked at the sculptor and then nodded her assent. "We decree that you shall build these statues in a hall set aside, into which no one shall enter until your work is complete and you proclaim that to us after opening the doors of the hall from within."
How is the white color created?
What were the best TV shows of 2022?
Is pizza a healthy food or junk food?
Extract all the different ways to describe dolls from these passages
What are some different types of desserts?
What is Ancient Girl's Frame
Who is Robert Mitchum?
What is the economy size of Tamil Nadu?
Is it faster to take the subway or drive a car?
Tell me whether these cities are part of ASEAN or not - Bangkok, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Kathmandu, Beijing, Tokyo, Osaka
What are some common onion varieties used in cooking?
Please summarize following information about Maria Astashkina.
Why does the James web Telescope rely so heavily on infrared?
When running a marathon and attempting to run a personal best time, categorize the following as either ‘useful’ or ‘not useful’, ‘dangerous’ or ‘neither. Fast digesting carbohydrates, a fire extinguisher, a weight vest, scissors, running shoes
Classify each of the following as something used for drinking or eating: cup, bottle, plate, bowl, fork, spoon, can
Who will win F1 championship in the world 2023
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Magneto, Dr. Polaris
Why is Pickleball sport so popular
Is a vegan diet health for the average person?
What is a good slogan for carpet?
Who was injured or killed and in what ways in the accidents?
Who are the most commonly mentioned best rappers of all time?
What is orange wine?
Which book is Mary Shelley most famous for?
According to the following passage, what was the cause of the Great Chicago Fire?
What is an octave?
From the passage provided, extract which cinema industries are located in Mumbai
why are lot of the women more structured and methodical in work, compared to men
Give me a list of the best movies I've never seen.
Write a review of Brandon Sanderson's book, The Hero of Ages
What are a few ways that I can keep my house cool when it is hot in the summer?
What are the key steps for building a an in ground pool?
Based on the following paragraph on drinking water, is there a risk of drinking too much water during exercising?
Is Rosebud a battlefield
Pick a title for the following:
The purpose of coaching is to form a partnership that enables you to draw more consistently on your wisdom, positive energy, and resourcefulness in decision-making, living a full life, and achieving your personal and professional goals by expanding your perspectives, being introspective, reducing blind spots, effectively managing self-limiting beliefs and feelings that block you, and developing new skills, habits, and practices.
Summarize what it is means to feel threatened?
What should I eat for dinner?
What is genome analysis?
What are the most popular implementations of Kafka?
Who are the best five living male comedians in the US?
Which of these sports leagues are considered part of Big 4 Sports leagues in the United States: MLS, NFL, La Liga, IPL, NHL
Given this paragraph about skydiving, give me the average time skydiver spends in freefall.
What are three effective approaches to improve weight loss?
From the passage provided, extract the name of the person that made some fountains in the garden, and how many. Your answer shall be of the format "{name} built {number of fountains} fountains."
How do I get better at the game of golf?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Onavillu, Lotar
Which is a species of fish? John Dory or Jack Sparrow
Who is playing in 2023 women’s NCAA championship game?
Which of these fruits, apple, strawberry, tomato, orange, cherry, grape; would be a poor choice to end a line in a song lyric with?
Classify each item as being related to "golf" or "football": Iron, driver, quarterback, lineman, putter, tee, linebacker
Generally in socer games, which position scores goals more often: the strikers or the backs?
What outfit should I wear when traveling to San Francisco in May?
What is an earphone?
Given this reference test, what is the daily recommended amount of magnesium for women in the U.S.?
What episodes did William Gibson write for "The X-Files"?
Extract the names of the singles from the text as a bulleted list.
Which is a species of fish? Hamlet or Othello
Discuss ways in which brands in your industry (or industry of your choice) could benefit from the web's gift to measurement: "the ability to fail faster. At a low cost." Provide at least one example supporting your ideas
Tell me which is a language and which is a type of people: Malayali & Malayalam
Why do humans like sports?
Tell me some brief highlights as to why adopting a vegan diet is a better choice.
Why do people try to reach the top of Mount Everest?
What are the key points that can be extracted regarding antisemitism from the below text?
Describe a plan for a trip to San Francisco (Bay Area), California. Your plan should include a budget, a timeline, and a description of the sights and activities at spot
What are some ways of traveling from Washington D.C to San Francisco?
I follow you all the time and copy your every move, but you can’t touch me or catch me. What am I?
Name all members of The Beatles
How to escape from a helicopter trapped in water ?
What are possible alliances for the future of AI?
Which is the odd one out? Silver, Gold, Mercury, Phosphorous, Copper, Zinc
Provide the 3 best options if your boat engine hits a rock and breaks the prop while fishing?
What is the best way to prep concrete before applying epoxy?
List some common citrus-based beverages.
Classify these artist as either country or pop: Dua Lipa, Harry Styles, Alan Jackson, Morgan Wallen, Taylor Swift, Thomas Rhett
What is Web3?
Extract best tourist attractions in Karnataka
What is the best way to get faster at running long distances?
What percent of the population were Hungarian?
What is biathlon?
Which gameshow host is a vegetarian?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Targaryen?
Give me a bulleted list of the three trimesters and the corresponding weeks of pregnancy
Who is Franz Kafka?
Classify below into more useful and less useful minerals in our food: iron, calcium, magnesium, chloride, selenium, potassium, phosphorous,  zinc, iodine, mercury, copper.
How should I make a good pizza tonight?
Give a comma separated list of all the people listed in this passage about Jesse LaFollette
My family wants to buy a dog.  Which breed should we chose?
According to his business card what job did Al Capone do
How can one find time to do everything effectively in life?
What are the main challenges to  solar panel adoption ?
Where is Danny Brannagan from
Detect and mask PII in this text 
"My name is Joe Smith and email address is joesmith9999@gmail.com. I'd like to leave a review about Vizio's 55 OLED TV. It had great picture quality, but I had trouble mounting it on the wall.". 
Give me back a JSON result of the form 
{
  "original_text": <the original text>, 
  "masked_text": <text with PII masked>", 
  "pii_detected": [{"pii_type": <the type of PII>, "value": <PII text value>}]
}
Imagine you met an alien last night and write about this in your diary
Classify each of the words as singular or plural: lions, bee, door, fence, ocean, lakes, people
How do I make Aioli?
Among these, which is not an Indian drink: Thandai, Barfi, Sharbat, and Lassi?
What is Pura Vida?
Classify these foods as vegan, vegetarian or neither: frittata, yogurt, apple, lard, chicken noodle soup, tofu, flour, cheesecake
What is a T20 cricket game?
Give me some examples of igneous rocks.
Ramon Magsaysay Award 2022 was given to 4 persons
From the passage provided, extract the company that all original presto developers joined in 2020
What are the best brunch places in Burlingame, CA?
What kind of guitar pick did Stevie Ray Vaughan prefer?
When did Singapore achieve independence?
Where Is The Charging Port On A Tesla Model Y?
What is an ATM?
What temperature does water boil at in Celsius and Fahrenheit
What is the video game Diablo
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sikulu, Sharki
Classify the following Greek philosophers by their schools of thought: Democritus, Anaximander, Protagoras, Epictetus, Chrysippus, Theano, Pythagorus and Heraclides.
Is Chi Kraeng River in South America, Southeast Asia, or Australia?
Name different games that can be played at a casino in Las Vegas.
Why is University of Wisconsin Madison the best college?
What are the best beach family vacation spots on the east coast?
Extract how many meetings rooms and seats are available in the main hall from the passage provided
How long is a chukker in Polo?
Who is Mariano Sánchez?
What is the new  record of Javelin throw made by Neeraj Chopra
What are recommended things to do or have when adopting a puppy?
Wat is goede vrijdag?
What are the words of House Merryweather?
What’s a good way to lose weight
What do Logan, Ororo, Charles, Jean, and Scott have in common?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Crakehall?
Classify the overall sentiment of this piece of text as either positive or negative: The little girl really wanted to buy that beautiful dress but her mom did not have enough money.
How do I know which bank is better?
What is your political stance?
Please give me a brief history of the Edinburgh Central Library?
Based on the above passage, mention the list of countries where Bengal tiger inhabits now.
Classify the following animals as either plant-only eaters or meat eaters: kangaroo, camel, bear, bison, cat, hippo, wolf, raccoon, alligator, hawk, rabbit, koala, horse, zebra, giraffe, goat, shark, dog, chicken, snake.
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Alfa Romeo, Cadilliac
Rank countries with highest population
Give me multiple modes of transport to get to Australia
Tell me if these are countries in the Americas or in Europe: Spain, Guyana, Peru, Netherlands, Belgium, Canada, French Guiana
What is the sun sign of someone born november 12
In the series, A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Baelish?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Metallophone, Doshpuluur
When to use stones in your landscape?
Where is the Kilwa Tanga
categorize each of the following into these groups: solid, liquid, and gas.
ice, neon (at room temperature), water, whiskey, a chair, carbon dioxide, and glass
Make a list for basic school supplies.
When is the best time of year to visit Seattle?
Where was the game of Pickle Ball invented.
Why is summer in California so great?
tell me how much Amazon Prime would cost
What are some qualities that make a good computer programmer?
What is an emote?
Which US city is best known for its Mardi Gras celebrations?
Classify the following games in ascending order of computational complexity: tic-tac-toe, chess, checkers, go
What are some passwords I should not be using?
What is Emotional Quotient (EQ)/Emotional Intelligence, and why is it a critical trait for leaders to possess?
Given a reference text about Lee Kuan Yew, tell me when they were born, when they were president, and what their most famous accomplishment was in office.
Which of the following are bait for fishing and which are candy: live worms, gummy worms, lollipops, Hershey's kisses, crickets, and leeches.
Classify the sentences below based on the sentiment - neutral, positive, negative, or angry

1. My shirt is red in color
2. I am so mad about losing my Airpods.
3. I am tired of being stuck in traffic every day.
4. I am so stressed and overwhelmed at work.
5. Work is so energizing
6. I love sunsets at the beach.
7. My best vacation place is Rome
8. They sing Fado in Lisbon
9. Somebody's going to get hurt so bad - watch it !
10. I have a meeting at 3pm
What's the difference between splitboarding and snowboarding?
What is a "frunk" in an electric vehicle?
List some common symptoms that someone may experience if they acquired a gastrointestinal bug.
Q: What treatments are available in the U.S. to treat COVID-19?
What is March Madness?
Classify the below states based on which coast they are located .
Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Maine, Maryland, California, Oregon
What happens if we forcefully immerse a empty bottle inside the water?
"We can do it" slogan / catchphrase - Who made it?
Colonies or provinces? How did the Spanish Empire treat its overseas territories?
Give me 3 totally distinct ways to eat a banana
What event triggered the start of WWI?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Orange County
What is the Wessex Football League
Why does adding water to a hot pan of oil cause fire?
Summarize what Harry Potter is about
Give me a list of suggestions on how I can reduce cat allergens in my home.
Why is my electrical outlet not working?
Where did Riley Redgate sarted her first novel?
What is the The Science Laureates of the United States Act of 2013
Write an friendly, convincing e-mail to my landlord asking whether I can get a dog
List the types of cured pork that can be used to make carbonara. Separate them with a comma.
How to be happy?
Extract the difference between Gross Disposable income from Disposable Income
Name five MLB teams in the National League.
Name some masterpieces of Russian Literature
Extract from the text the main characters in the show Bluey, the relationship to the main character, and list them using bullets in format {character name}: {relationship to Bluey}
What generation is the best generation?
Give me the top guitar players of all time
List the ten episode titles from the fifth season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Which is a species of fish? Bream or Cream
What is dihydrogen monoxide?
What are the different recurring costs associated with homeownership apart from mortgage?
Classify each of the following as either a brand of kombucha or a soda brand: Humm, Brew Doctor, Pepsi, 7Up, Mountain Dew, Coca-Cola, Sprite, Fanta, GT's, Remedy, Health-Ade
Best workout in the world.
Tell me some facts about hemoglobin with the given text as a reference
Who's band was The Quarrymen
What are the key features of a Galleon
Difference between EST and EDT?
Think up of a bunch of different holidays celebrated in the US
What is DNA sequence assembly?
Name three movies that have an optimistic post-apocalyptic feel.
Where are brook trout found?
What is the sport of Ultimate?
how can you generate passive income?
How to be a good human being?
What is the most invaded country in history?
What is Chardonnay?
How does Walter White die in Breaking bad
In which country are the world's four busiest commuter rail stations located?
Should I become an influencer?
Based on this paragraph, please list the symptoms of dementia separating them with bullets.
what is the Algeria independence date
What are the advantages of space based telescopes?
Imagine you are the last person on Earth. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
What type of car should I buy if I live in a city?
Extract the names of villages in the commune of Dăeni from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What was the last item shown on British TV before WW2
Given this reference text about the Flex Computer System, why was it created?
Which is a species of fish? Puppy or Pupfish
When did Ivan Zhevakhov joined the military?
Write a horror movie synopsis of a couple who move into house and the movie must involve AI. Give it an M Night Shyamalam twist ending
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Dog, Asian Elephant
what is the speed limit on the UK M1 Road?
What was gangsters George Nelsons nickname
Separate the currencies from the other units of measure in the following list: United States Dollar, Canadian Dollar, Chinese Yuan, Japanese Yen, Swiss Franc, centimeter, inch, Mexican Peso, mile, kilometer, foot, liter, gallon, Russian Ruble, Singapore Dollar, Chilean Peso, Norwegian Krone, stone.
Which of these items are not allowed in a carry on baggage in a flight? Medicines, Swiss Knife, Mirror, Wine bottle, Toy Gun, Scissors, herbs, dogs.
What are some uses for a buff?
How is an electric field produced?
Is there The Disabled Students Allowance in the UK
Given this paragraph about National Beer Day in the United States, which president signed National Beer Day into law?
How did Rotisserie baseball become popular?
What are the tax boxes in the Netherlands?
Think up of different foods that are good for when you are sick
Why do people get sore after working out?
Which of these are reptiles: frog, snake, toad, lizard, turtle, fish, dog, cat, crocodile
Who was the most prolific religious leader ever?
Which of the following songs are by the Grateful Dead and which are by The Beatles: Don't Let Me Down, Sugar Magnolia, Hey Jude, Bertha, Throwing Stones, Let It Be, Truckin', Friend of the Devil, Uncle John's Band, and Here Comes the Sun.
How many official languages are spoken in India?
Please share some important points about actress Zendaya using given passage as a reference
Give me different ways I can travel from one place to another
Please summarize how to create printable models on my 3D printer?
What is the Pacific Ring of Fire?
What are the three largest ethnic groups in Kenya?
What are hoagies, or sub sandwiches called in the state of Rhode Island?
When did Istanbul (Constantinople) captured by Ottoman?
When to use mulch for your landscape?
Can a neutral wire in a home electrical circuit give me an electric shock
What is SAML?
Roslyn is 36 years of age, weighs 74 kg, is 165 cm tall, and has 35% body fat. Her father had a heart attack at age 68 and her brother had an angioplasty at age 40. Both are living and well. Her blood chemistry values measure total cholesterol at 195 mg% and HDL cholesterol at 42 mg%. Her fasting blood sugar is 105 mg%. Roslyn is sedentary and has engaged in no endurance training program since college. Think about and state Roslyn's cardiovascular risk factors. What would you suggest she do to improve any risk factors of concern?
Tell me whether these are states or cities: Alabama, Alaska, Wyoming, Washinton DC, Salt Lake city, San Francisco
What are the 5 best ways to control cortisol
What country has the highest life expectancy?
What is Remote Sensing?
When was the Goan civil code established?
Which is India's 3rd Company which has crossed $100 billion market capitalization in Intraday trading?
Tell me whether each of these numbers is prime or not: 10, 13, 11, 29, 35, 54, 41
What are the symptoms and causes of migraine headaches?
What is a dataset?
What constitutes the AWS Kinesis family?
Why do cats have so many different types of personalities?
How many cents is a nickel worth?
what is love?
Classify the following information as 'PII' or 'not PII' : Social Security Number, Home Address, Age, Number of Employees, City Population, Gender, Business Phone
From the below text extract the year and list all movies released in that year separated by a comma in the form {Year} - {all movies released in that year} and show this as a bullet list
List all the awards received by  Devon Dikeou in chronological order
Why is pickleball growing more popular than tennis?
Name some Hip-Hop duos.
Why is it important to lift weights?
Who is Marina Vishmidt
How many dwarf planets are there in our solar system?
Why do hindus worship idols?
What are some of the best movies for kids?
Give me a list of the last 7 FIFA world cup winning teams
Apply the traditional western culture label (domesticated pet, farm animal, wild animal) to each of the following animals: dog, sheep, horse, wolf, cat, zebra, cow
What time of year does school normally start in the United States?
What are some ways in which I could use old books?
What are five capital cities in Asia?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Casterly?
Give me three spicy authentic Chinese food dishes
How do I get in shape?
How can I improve Kafka performance with Spark?
Tell me different stages in data lifecycle.
I bought two bottles of 2L coca-cola when they were on special, but when I checked my receipt, I was charged the full price! Please contact me on 0410787999 or iratecustomer@hotmail.com to discuss a refund!
What type of television program did Julia Child work on?
Which of the following ski resorts are located in Utah: Alta Ski Area, Brighton Ski Resort, Snowbird, Solitude Mountain Resort, Deer Valley Resort, Park City Mountain,  Woodward Park City, Nordic Valley Resort, Powder Mountain, Snowbasin, Sundance Resort, Beaver Mountain Resort, Cherry Peak Resort, Brian Head Resort, Eagle Point Resort, Keystone, Copper Mountain, Vail Resort, Beaver Creek, Eldora
Will the Penrith Panthers win the NRL Grand Final this year?
According to this paragraph, how many NCAA championships has UVA won?
What colors are in the traditional style of American tattoos?
Name an old wives tale
What is the weather like in San Francisco, CA?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Suikinkutsu, Domra
What are some best practices to prepare biryani
Classify each of the following as either a liquid or a solid: puddle, cup, house, dog, bowl, water, juice
Given a reference text about the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) awards, tell me how many albums need to be sold to get an award.
Who are the most influential Asian celebrities?
I'm hosting a breakfast party - what should I serve?
When was the theory of comparative advantage developed?
What is Women's freestyle 48 kg competition featured in 2017 World Wrestling Championships?
Classify each of the following as a novel or poem: "A Silvia", "L'Infinito" , "I Promessi Sposi"
Who was the Apostle Paul?
What is binary search ?
From the passage provided, extract the list of software products sold by Adobe in the order they appear in the passage.
Write a polite e-mail from my cat to the neighbor's cat, asking it to please stay out of his special area of the lawn.
What are some of the most popular tourist attractions in Rome?
Tell me the capital of the UK. Then tell me a famous song about that city.
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Abarth, Buick
What are data warehouses design patterns
Extract all the academic degrees from the text
Classify each artist as "country" or "rap": Brad Paisley, Morgan Wallen, 50 Cent, Thomas Rhett, 21 Savage, Gucci Mane
What other names are used to refer to Taweret, the Egyptian goddess:
What were the 'Big Four' railway companies in the UK before nationalisation
What is the Mile of Music?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Isuzu, Cadillac
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Crotale, Kannel
Tell me about the career of Erik Dekker
When was the Berlin wall torn down?
Give me three recipes from different cuisines that I can make with potatoes and chicken
Give a list of all the names of people that Arboe trained under?
What are the top 3 items that I need when traveling by plane.
Classify each of the following as either a brass or woodwind instrument: flute, clarinet, oboe, trombone, trumpet, and tuba.
Given a reference text about parks in Edina, determine the average size of its parks.
What is the capital of Hawaii?
Why are ragdoll cats called ragdolls?
Do any airlines sponsor the UEFA Champions League (as of 2023)?
What's the main benefits of a Subaru Forester Wilderness?
What is Redis?
Write an opening passage to a story that is based on a world where cloning is rampant, in the style of dark humor.
Is the blue-ring octopus harmless?
In which regions has Starbucks come under scrutiny?
How can UV light be used?
Extract the awards that Bob Sanders gained throughout his career, and put them in a comma-separated list.
Tell me whether these are popular sports are more popular in United States of America or in Australia.
Cuzco, Machu Pichu is a famous place located in which country?
What do you need when you see a blue flag during the race?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Hyoshigi, Ronroco
Tell me whether these are days of the week or months in the year: Monday, Saturday, March, December, October, Tuesday,  January, Wednesday, Friday, April.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Ganges River Dolphin, Helicoprion
Which is a species of fish? Shaver or Razorfish
Tell me whether each of these players is a quarterback or running back: Ezekiel Elliot, Peyton Manning, Lamar Jackson, Leonard Fournette, Sam Darnold, Derrick Henry
What were five of the best english language situation comedies from the 1990s?
What is the genomics of disease?
Given this paragraph about battles during India Independence day, what was the date when India win the Independence
What is trekking ? Discuss various types of trekking.
What rhymes with orange?
How to add two cells in Excel?
When was Galaga released?
Who is Asa Wood?
Give me the list of all French president during the fifth Republic
Classify list as breeds of either a 'dog' or a 'cat': Border Collie, Siamese, Maine Coon, German Shepard, Persian, and Corgi?
How long do I need to work before I retire?
What are the 3 branches of science?
What are some items I should stock up on from the grocery store to have in my pantry
Can you recommend best taco places in Austin?
What is electric current and how is it measured?
Explain the use of screens in basketball
Which of these sports involve a ball: swimming, baseball, javelin, hockey, cycling, high jump, tennis, , netball, basketball, and handball.
What is a romance language?
What is the PEDALS method
Luka Modrić (Croatian pronunciation: [lûːka mǒːdritɕ]; born 9 September 1985) is a Croatian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for La Liga club Real Madrid and captains the Croatia national team. He plays mainly as a central midfielder, but can also play as an attacking midfielder or as a defensive midfielder. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest midfielders of all time, and as the greatest ever Croatian footballer.

Born in Zadar, Modrić's childhood coincided with the Croatian War of Independence which displaced his family. In 2002, he was signed by Dinamo Zagreb at age 16, after showing promise with his hometown club NK Zadar's youth team. He continued his development in Zagreb, before spells on loan to Zrinjski Mostar and Inter Zaprešić. He made his debut for Dinamo in 2005 and won three consecutive league titles and domestic cups, being named the Prva HNL Player of the Year in 2007. In 2008, he moved to Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur for a club-record transfer fee of £16.5 million, where he led Spurs to their first UEFA Champions League appearance in almost 50 years, reaching the quarter-finals of the 2010–11 tournament.

In the summer of 2012, Modrić joined Real Madrid for a £30 million transfer fee. There he became a key contributor and helped the team win La Décima and was selected for the 2013–14 Champions League squad of the season. After Zinedine Zidane took over Madrid, Modrić was critical to three consecutive Champions League titles from 2015–16 to 2017–18, each time being voted into the squad of the season. He has won twenty-two major trophies at Real Madrid, including five UEFA Champions League titles, three La Liga titles, one Copa del Rey, four Supercopa de España titles, four UEFA Super Cup titles and five FIFA Club World Cup titles. He won the La Liga Award for "Best Midfielder" in 2016 for the second time, and the UEFA Club Football Award for "Best Midfielder" in 2017 and 2018. In 2015, he became the first Croatian player to be included in the FIFA FIFPRO World 11, in which he was regularly included until 2019 and then again in 2022, as well in the UEFA Team of the Year between 2016 and 2018. In 2018, Modrić became the first Croatian player to win the UEFA Men's Player of the Year Award, and by winning The Best FIFA Men's Player and Ballon d'Or awards, he became the first player other than Lionel Messi or Cristiano Ronaldo to claim the awards in more than a decade. In 2019, he was awarded the Golden Foot award for career results and personality.

Modrić made his international debut for Croatia against Argentina in March 2006, and scored his first international goal in a friendly match against Italy. Modrić has anchored Croatia's "second Golden Generation", participating in every major tournament Croatia has qualified for, including the UEFA Euro 2008, 2012, 2016, and 2020, as well as the 2006, 2014, 2018, and 2022 FIFA World Cup. At the Euro 2008, he was selected for the Team of the Tournament, becoming only the second Croatian to ever achieve this honour. Following group stage eliminations in his first two World Cups, Modrić led Croatia to the 2018 World Cup Final, winning the Golden Ball in process. At the following tournament, he led the team to a third-place finish, winning the Bronze Ball in process. In March 2021, he went on to become the country's most capped player in history. Furthermore, he has been named Croatian Footballer of the Year a record eleven times between 2007 and 2022.
Who are the top 4 in EPL?
Who is the company Nestle
What is a Japanese dish of prepared rice, usually with some sugar and salt, accompanied by a variety of ingredients, such as seafood, often raw, and vegetables?
why do dogs like humans?
Why playing Phase 10 make people so angry?
What are some necessary equipment for camping?
Which DJ Introduced BeatBullyz on the BBC Introducting stage?
How many disciplines of rowing are there?
Classify each as of the following as physical or digital: pencil, pen, paper, email, social media, pavers, gutters, cryptocurrency
From this paragraph, give me a bullet points of colors sapphires be?
Classify each of the following products as an Apple, Amazon, or Microsoft product: Airpods, Xbox, Alexa, Fire TV Stick, iPhone, Surface Pro, Macbook
Write a plan for a road trip to ski resorts in California that are available on the Ikon pass, with stops at three different resorts. The plan should depart and end at San Francisco, include a budget, timeline, and short description of each resort.
Who is Marlon Brando and when he was born?
What is the main benefit of the fianchetto in chess openings?
What is your favorite teaching from Stoic philosophy?
What events are included in an Olympic Decathlon?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Vegavis, Continental Tiger
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Porsche, Chrysler
What are some of the best Easter Basket fillers for teenagers?
Write me a song about a summer romance
Name three schools that are part of the university of London
What is Scotland's largest lake?
Of the following, which are colors of a rainbow: black, red, white, gold, purple, orange, green, blue, yellow, gray
Who was the highest-paid College president in 2003-2004 in U.S.?
Where can the Amorphoscelis elegans be found
What is Michael Pollan's top bestselling book?
Should I ask my partner to marry me?
What's the best genre of music?
Tell me whether each of these dishes are served cold or hot: pizza, pasta, tiramisu, ice cream, ribs, steak, ceviche
What type of music is featured in the album The Great Ray Charles
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in India or Syria.
Kolkāta, Mumbai, Aleppo, Delhi, Homs, Damascus
What is the spin of a quark?
What is Jon Snow's true name?
What is a shogi?
Why was Advani concerned about Modi’s appointment as a chief minister of Gujarat?
Who is John Quincy Adams?
Extract the names of the teams that Michael Jordan has been a part of from the text below.
What is a smart contract?
Using the passage below, in Machine Learning, what is unsupervised learning and is it different from supervised learning?
What is the first name of the man Evershed crater was named after?
here is a short history of Plainview – Old Bethpage John F. Kennedy High School, which color was changed when the name changed in 1991?
I have eggs, flour, sugar and baking soda- what can I make?
Who fought in the Second Battle of Bapaume?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: BMW, Cadilliac
What is the capital of Alaska?
Given the paragraph summarizing the life of Arnold Boate, list the countries in which he lived.
Believe it or not, Jimi Hendrix only had one Top 40 hit. Which song was it?
What are the three commonly accepted periods of human pre-history?
What did the CFO do after Paypal?
Write down some important aspects of short story Reason from the given text
Give me a list of ski and snowboard apparel brands I have to buy
Given this reference text, why and when did Coke use Splenda as a sweetener in diet Coke?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Harvey Dent, Wilson Fisk
Who is Paul Cezanne?
Write an intro to a meetup about music, medicine, and machines
Given these paragraphs about Natural hydrogen, what are other forms of hydrogen obtained using different processes?
Can you put metal in a microwave?
Classify each of the following as a baseball or soccer term: pitcher, goalie, inning, goal, yellow card, red card, home run, catcher
What are some physical activities I could do on a sunny day?
Who is Travis Payne?
What are the two locations the A's are considering for building their new baseball stadium?
What was "the Dry Capital of the World"?
How do I decide how to buy a bicycle?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Thylacoleo, Skipjack Tuna
Classify these as faster or slower than driving a car: running, flying a plane, riding a bike, walking, driving a boat.
What is "Sex and the City"?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sambal, Yueqin
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Goema, Requinto
Is simul climbing more dangerous for the leader or the follower?
Extract the names of the the Handler family from these passages
What is the difference between hardwood and softwood?
What is Delta Live Tables?
What is the difference between love and affection?
What is a PIN?
What’s so interesting about Pokemon Go?
Tell me about John Henry Moore II
What is Biryani?
Give me a bulleted list of some programming languages
Should differential privacy be used in the U.S. census?
What are a couple of good ideas to celebrate a spring birthday for an adult?
From the passage provided, extract the type of breed and the characteristics of the dog ?
Based on this summary of Lebron James career, what are the key reasons he is considered the greatest basketball player of all time?
What is 2023 World Baseball Classic?
What is the difference between the words ‘this’ and ‘that’?
Write a short message to send to your doctor to ask if you need to make a separate appointment for each of your vaccines for an upcoming vacation to South Africa. The doctor is named Dr. Gupta
Give me 3 different things that a smartphone can do better than a landline phone
Extract all the airports listed in this reference paragraph
How many mathematicians does the main protagonist meet in the musical "Fermat's Last Tango"?
Which is a species of fish? Barracuda or Barracks
give me a list of places I have to visit in Rome.
Give me a list of the last 5 NHL championship teams
What was the most expensive car ever sold at auction
What is marginal cost rate design in the domain of electric utilities
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Thattai, Tanpura
Can you brainstorm some ideas for blog posts about Kubernetes?
The Nobel Prize in Literature  was awarded to the novelist
Which of the Jurassic Park movies were based on novels?
Is Italian closer to French or to German?
Who is Steven Spielberg?
How many syllables are in the word cat?
What is the difference between longboard and shortboard surfing?
What are the ways you can use Zoom?
Why is Pickleball getting so popular?
What are the three styles of Shakespeare?
How does the Stock Market work?
List all the names of people mentioned in this passage.  Use a numbered list.
Please write a haiku
Given this paragraph about Pharaohs, when the title used to address the kings of egypt
What are the qualities of good compost for a vegetable garden?
How does an LCD panel work?
What are monsoons in India?
Can you write me a page long essay on whether capitalism needs to be reexamined and amended?  Is such a reexamination one of incremental or transformational change?  If so, why?  If not, why not?
Classify each of the following as either hotdog or not hot dog: bratwurst, wienersnitschel, hoagie, legs, Hebrew National, finger, banana, sausage
What is The Masters?
When was Santa Monica founded?
Give me a list of summer activities for an 8-year-old.
What are three cities on the west coast of Florida?
What ancient organization invented the concept of Democracy?
What are the main components of a drum set?
What are some creative inspirations for a beginner photographer?
Why am I allergic to cats?
What tool should I use to cut wood
tell me the category for these movies "Star Trek, Star Wars, John Wick, Indiana Jones"
What is Singlish?
What is the scientific formula for table salt?
Given this paragraph about Arlington Virginia, how many elementary schools are there in the county's public education system?
When I ski my legs form an A-frame shape and it doesn't look very nice, how can I fix this?
Describe a trip through the United States for a 14 day vacation in a rental car
Pleaese give me a short list of the main characteristics of cricketer Sachin Tendulkar's playing style.
tell me a way to slice an apple.
Categorize the following list into color names and non-color words: red, yellow, leafy, bankers, fuchsia, magenta, cerulean, purple, lavender, blue, orange, felt
5 ways to increase stamina
During WWII, how many Japanese Americans were forcibly relocated and incarcerated?
What songs are on the AC/DC album Back in Black?
Tell me about a random street in Berlin
What does a geologist do?
What is the best way to get to Philadelphia from Downingtown if you do not have a car?
Write an explanation for why someone would want to visit New York City. Use details about the nightlife, restaurants, arts and entertainment.
What is SSL?
What popular books did Stephen King author?
Name some fruits that have green skin.
What is an illegal building technique?
What's the differences of the Wing Chun kongfu and the traditional Shaolin Kongfu?
Should a man get married when he is young, or wait until he is older?
How do you make wine?
Classify each of the following as a French or Italian company: Campari, Dior, Hermes, Ferrari, Prada
What is Rust?
What are the four standard sizes of beds in the United States?
What is the terminal outbound station of the D line in the Boston MBTA?
Given this paragraph about pyramids , when was the first pyramid built?
What are your views on the "First Principles" by "Thomas E. Ricks"
How many human beings are on the planet?
Imagine you are the last person on Earth. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
List down some important points about Indore city in India from given text
Why donuts have holes?
Give me a bulleted list of some things that could go wrong skateboarding down a steep hill
From the passage provided, extract where Java was developed
List the names of five of Adam Sandler's movies
What is the state flower of California?
Name five NBA teams in the Eastern Conference.
Is the Tiger population Increasing in India?
If a straight line passes through the points (4,2) and (8,6) then where does it cross the x axis? Explain your answer.
What is the difference between Azure Synapse Dedicated SQL Pools and Serverless SQL Pools?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pakhavaj, Mejoranera
Based on this paragraph, what does Briony mean when she says at the conclusion: ""I like to think that it isn't weakness or evasion, but a final act of kindness, a stand against oblivion and despair, to let my lovers live and to unite them at the end."
What is a mulligan in Magic the Gathering?
In Japan what color car is reserved for the royal family only
Why are reaction channels popular on YouTube?
Give me a bulleted list of the Real Housewives series in chronological order.
Explain the black and white smoke during the Pope election
Given this paragraph about composer Paul Lansky, did he have an advanced degree?
Give me a list of popular SUVs available in North America
According to this paragraph, what are the "Old Dorms" at the University of Virginia?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Taxi horn, Sihu
Name three famous movies about sports.
What tools do people use to communicate in 2023?
Which is bigger, a beagle or a basset?
Think of five quirky marketing slogans for a new Fashion Brand TV campaign. It must be a little arrogant and sharp.
Name five capital cities in the USA.
What are some countries I could go backpacking in if I want to see the Alps?
When was George Washington born?
Classify each method of communication as "verbal" or "written": e-mail, phone call, slack chat, zoom meeting, text, post mail
Tell me whether you can or cannot legally drive a car or each of the following: road, highway, sidewalk, interstate, pedestrian only bridge
Can you write down some different boroughs of New York City?
Who has the most #1 hits in music?
Who am I?
How do you make an electronic music song?
How long have musical instruments been in existence?
Why is a pomegranate known as a hand grenade?
What is Cricket in sports?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Sandman, Clayface
Why are Donald Trump’s followers stereotyped as idiots?
Do you know any other languages besides english?can you name colors in ARABIC?
Who is the primary female antagonist on "The X-Files"?
Classify the following as smooth or sharp: broken glass, thorn, leather, baby skin, cactus, mirror
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Fiddlesticks, Tricordia
Tell me which of these albums were by AC/DC, Judas Priest, or Van Halen:  Back in Black, Screaming for Vengeance, Stained Class, British Steel, Painkiller, Women and Children First, 1984, Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap, Diver Down, Rocka Rolla, Powerage
Classify each of the following as either round or square shape: wheel, paper napkin, building block, ring, coin, ball, grid, bread, bubble, dice, hula hoop, window, stamp, earth, crossword, tambourine, bagel, keyboard key, cube, letter O.
How many items is in a baker's dozen?
Given a reference text about a snowball effect, tell me how it applies to aerospace engineering.
Will any country learn from their own mistakes and not repeat history?
Categorize the companies based on their ownership status.
Meta, Microsoft, Amazon, Deloitte, KPMG, Ernst & Young
What are some signs and symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes?
How may I find a charging port outdoors for my laptop?
Given a reference text about the Davie School, tell me when it was added to the register of historic places and when it was open and closed..
List the founders of MicroStrategy and surround the first name of the founder who served as CEO in quotes.
why peoples eating popcorn in the cinema?
Put yourself in the place of a consumer who is considering the purchase of a new car. What sources of information would you use to evaluate your options during ZMOT (Zero moment of truth)?
Extract the source of silicone carbide in nature.
What does Pinot noir mean?
Name the five plays of The Hill Town Plays by Lucy Thurber.
Give me some ideas of activities to do in Romania
What does GPT stand for in ChatGPT?
Where can I go to request an absentee ballot for an upcoming election in Wisconsin, or to track the status of my ballot request?
What is Apache Spark?
In a concise bulleted list, tell me what audiologists do when they are seeing a patient
From the passage note down the biggest institutional shareholders of Credit Suisse. List the results in comma separated format.
What is a capital gain in finance?
What is the largest coral reef system in the world?
Categorize each of the following with their associated holiday, either "Christmas", "Easter" or "Halloween". Bunny, egg, cobwebs, candy bucket, candy basket, lights, Santa
Give me a list of what to do with used brake rotors.
In the given passage, List me some points about the TV show : Locke & Key
Extract all the country names in the paragraph, and list them separated by commas.
Given this paragraph, what were the regional release dates for Viva Piñata: Party Animals?
Who are the Weasleys?
Summarize what and when the quiet periods occur during an IPO.
Provide a comma separated list of all the universities listed in this passage
Why do Dutch people always ride a bicycle?
Tell me whether these are types of pears or types of apples: Anjou, Bartlett, Bosc, Cosmic Crisp, Fuji, Granny Smith, Plymouth.
List all the competitors in the 1997 Italian Open for Mens Singles
Why do people like to play Path of Exile?
What is the Culture Against Man
What kind of fungi are Ochrolechiaceae
How old is Boo Boo Bear?
Write a beautiful bedtime 5 paragraph story for a 4 years old. The outline of the story is: a small boy, named Jonny goes on an adventure with his family.
What are some good places to visit in and around Austin?
Who are some of the best guitarists of all time?
Which months were added to the calendar and why?
What is the capital of CA?
Given this paragraph about Vice-Admiral Alexander Colville, tell me when he died and what battles he fought in.
From the passage below, list the prizes won by Laia Forcadell Arenas.
What is the proper greeting for Passover?
Who wrote the biography of Steve Jobs?
Categorize each of the following as 'Programming Language' or 'Not a Programming Language'
Who is the founder of Vanguard?
what kinds of shoes are there?
How many years was Hutchinson's streak, and what caused it to end?
How do you play the game of LoL?
What awards did Bill Murray receive for Lost in Translation?
Name a Jane Austen book.
Given this text about Heracles' twelve labors, construct a list of characters that either help him in his quest, how, and why.
Give me 3 ideas for an instant serotonin boost.
Given this paragraph about video game consoles, when was the Nintendo DS released?
Looking at cities in Australia that are on the east coast and the west coast of the country, which coast are the cities of Fremantle, Sydney, Brisbane, Perth, Cairns, Townsville, Newcastle located on?
What is the universe made of?
What is on the DVD Our Favorite Things
Who are the known members of the student group named Dumbledor's Army, from the Harry Potter book series.
In what key do most car horns honk?
Who is the largest coatings company in the world by revenue?
Are seed oils bad for you?
In autosports, what is the apex and racing line?
What is National Financial Switch or NFS?
How many colours does a rainbow have?
Did Tropics to the Snow win any awards?
Why can helicopters not fly as fast as airplanes?
Classify each of the following as either a state in the United States or a country: Georgia, California, Alaska, Canada, Peru, Texas, Florida, Pennsylvania, New Mexico, Mexico, Ireland, Russia, Oregon
Classify the following cricketers as batsman, bowlers, or all rounders.
David Warner, Trent Boult, Rohit Sharma, Virat Kohli, Rashid Khan, Quinton de Kock
What are the benefits of using the ReLU activation function over the classic sigmoid function in neural networks?
What is a reporting dashboard?
Write a story about getting stuck on a train
A triangle has angles of 25 degrees and 45 degrees. What is the last angle in the triangle?
What are some interesting facts around Wilmer McLean's residencies when it comes to the American Civil War?
Where did Allen Eager grow up?
What causes that feeling of weightlessness when you're on a rollercoaster?
Is it possible to prevent Type 2 Diabetes?
How many vaccines should I get, if a dog bites me?
Given this reference text about the Catholic University of America, tell me when it was established, where it is located, and who founded it.
Given this paragraph on French Revolution, what were the main causes
What is the book "The Sun Also Rises" about?
Give me a bullet list of lots of possible weather forecasts
Who are the CEO of National Association of Broadcasters
What singer has had a Billboard No. 1 hit in each of the last four decades?
Write a diary entry about a real life incident on your recent trip with your family
Which of the following are beach wear vs what one would wear on a cold winter trek? If there are common items, create a third category called 'Common':

Socks
Hats
Neck gaiter
Sunglasses
Swimsuits
Undershirts
Cover-ups
Down jacket
Trek poles
Water Shoes
Beanie
Sandals
What is the United States Bill of Rights?
Classify the below as food or drinks.
Fish, Meat, Salad, Apple, Lemonade, Coffee, Tea
Extract all unique names from the provided paragraphs separated by comma.
Why does the Earth revolve around the Sun?
What are some of the highest quality, full flavored cigars I can buy in the united states?
how to become fit
How do you check the weather on an iPhone?
Can you generate a 2 lines abstract of this text?
What birds can I find in San Francisco?
What is one of your favorite hobbies?
What are some of the greatest rock bands of all time?
Greta Thunberg is a Swedish Environmental activist has donated the  Prize  money of 1 million Euros for what cause?
What does Korla stand for?
Tell me how many final fours purdue has been to and whether or not they have won any championships
What is Github Copilot?
Tell me which of these are science fiction movies and which are fantasy: Lord of the Rings, Star Trek, Princess Mononoke, the Wheel of Time, District 9
Does a difference in prediction outcomes between two ethnic/gender groups from a credit scoring algorithm constitute a bias in the data collection process or the algorithm itself?
What did Special Agent Fox Mulder study when he was in university?
Why do gas prices go high in winter
Why democracy doesn't works and in old times we had autocracy?
Which NBA team has won the most championships?
Can you write me a haiku to boost my spirits today?
Tell me which of these is a Country, a City, a River, or a Mountain: New York, Nile, Amazon, Kilimanjaro, USA, Spain, Italy, Rome, Prague, Zurich, France, San Francisco, K2, Buenos Aires, Brazil, Mount Everest, London, Mekong
What are the first and third eras of aircraft history mentioned in the text below and when did they end? Use a bullet list and the format {Name} ({Year}).
Given this paragraph, what is the size in acres of Walt Disney World?
Does using microwave oven cause cancer?
Classify the following colors as primary or not primary: Red, blue, violet, white, black, green, yellow, orange
Who was Yoshikazu Shirakawa?
Given this paragraph about hickory wood, tell me what sporting equipment it might be used for.
Based on this paragraph about Massimo Bray, what language do you think he writes in?
What state is known as the Lone Star State?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Chicken, Mandarin duck, Egyptian goose
What is the best hand in Texas Hold'em poker?
Tell me if the following foods would be safe or unsafe for someone with a nut allergy to eat? Peanut butter, eggs, apples, pb&j, carrots, pad thai
Name the states of Northeast India.
Who is the founder of SpaceX?
Who is the all time leading goal scorer for Manchester United?
where is India
What is Categorization and Sentiment Analysis
When playing golf, categorize each of the following items as "useful" or "useless": Irons, putter, dumbbell, tees, skis, range finder, jeans, kayak.
The Global Climate Emergency report is based on scientific analysis of more than how many years?
What is the difference between pork roll and taylor ham
What is Unanimous?
Which tastes better, red or green grapes?
Samuel Tilden, Grover Cleveland, Al Gore, and Hillary Clinton share what distinction among U.S. presidential candidates?
What is a snook?
Add additional details about what chess is
What does a funambulist walk on?
What are the three highest peaks in the UK?
Make a list, using dot points, of the five foods I might find in the dairy section of a supermarket
Given this paragraph about the prehistory of Sri Lanka, what are the evidence for prehistoric human colonization in Sri Lanka?
Which of these words are homonyms (words that have two meanings): cleave, cotton, red, hungry
What was Jiang's previous position before becoming the president of China?
From the passage provided, extract the diameter of eukaryotic ribosomes.
What are the different methods to open a pomegranate?
What are some common proteins in tacos?
How can I spend more time with my dog?
Why do you get dental erosion?
What state was Margaret Hall from?
What is hot pot?
What are the best day trips near San Francisco?
Which is a species of fish? Sleeper or Snoozer
Which fictional LAPD detective is Titus Welliver known for playing?
Classify the below companies on whether they belong to India or Taiwan -
HDFC Bank, Infosys, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, Pegatron
Give me 5 ways to relax for an hour ?
What is the first letter of every sentence, separated by commas?
What's the best BBQ place in Austin
is Aadhaar a proof of residence or of citizenship?
Given this paragraph about ESPN's SportsCenter in 2009, in what west coast city did ESPN begin producing it's 1:00 a.m. Eastern Time edition of SportsCenter?
What kind of game is Binding of Isaac and what platforms can I play it on?
how do i heal my mind
What is Categorization and Sentiment Analysis
What is constitution?
Can you write a post advertising a social event for the end of the year?
Name some fruits that have yellow or orange skin.
Which of these are movies that Will Ferrell starred in and which ones did Jim Carrey star in? Elf, Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy, Step Brothers, Megamind, Zoolander, The Mask, Liar Liar, Sonic the Hedgehog, Dumb and Dumber, The Cable Guy, Ace Ventura: Pet Detective
What rock icon was the founder of The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Long-haired Men?
Why is lacrosse considered the fastest game on two feet?
Who was Christopher Columbus?
What is terrain cartography?
Pultizer Prize 2022 is given which field
What are the biggest cities in Germany?
Based on this passage, in what field did Raisa earn her PhD?
Who is Maria Ludwiga Michalk?
What methods of transportation to Dallas are unlikely to be available?
Which country produces the most pineapples?
Why did Major League Baseball introduce new rules for 2023?
What are the best hiking trails near Seattle, Washington?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Octobass, Bass clarinet
What is the difference between speed and velocity?
To which family does the Chasenella belong to
Given this paragraph about the Pearl Mill Village Historic District, tell me where it is located.
What is Pullman National Historical Park?
Classify each team as playing in the EPL or La Liga: Barcelona, Tottenham, Brighton, Liverpool, Sevilla, Valencia, Everton
What are the five smallest countries in Europe?
Given this text about Major League Baseball, how many games do teams play in the regular season and how many games are played in the World Series.
What goes into a credit score?
What is the Role of the Fourth Official in Football?
Provide a few different ideas for games for 4 adults to play.
What is an interception in American football? Write your response as if you are American explaining it to a coworker from another country.
5 most unusual ways to use screwdriver
Can you list a few cities that Obama lived in from the below text?
List the ingredients to make the best Greek salad
Given this short paragraph about Belize, how many people live there and what is notable about its population density?
How did Washington become a state?
Where was Mazzy Star formed?
Give me an overview of how promotion and relegation works in the English Premier League
What is the standard tuning for a 6 string guitar?
How soon should you make coffee after grinding the beans?
The following are a mix of english and hindi words. separate them out logically:
your
mujhe
lamp
pyaar
tamanna
tomorrow
perhaps
kyunki
how
your
yaar
shade
What film released and set in 1985 features Doc Brown's Delorean time machine that takes Marty McFly back to 1955 where he inadvertently prevented his birth by intervening when his mother and father first met and fell in love?
What are some different festivities people do on Easter?
What is the best way to tune a snare drum?
Given the reference text about Rafael Nadal, tell me how many singles grand slam titles he has won, which grand slam tournament he has won the most, and the main strength of his tennis game.
What is a short hiking trail in Tiburon?
Can you suggest 5 benefits of Genetical modification technologies like CRISPR ?
What are some good rainy day activities?
here is a blurb about byte pair encoding for encryption, what benefits does this concept have besides compression?
Compared to a human, categorize the following as fast or slow animals: sloth, cheetah, eagle, tortoise, hippo, slug, horse.
What is the best way to evaluate the performance of my marketing spend?
What are the names of the three largest United States Virgin Islands?
List top 5 people with most medals in the olympics
Who wins the point in tennis?
Which of the following are appropriate for a Black Tie dress code? A tuxedo, a blue suit, a loose sundress, a formal floor length gown?
From the passage note down the various celebrities who joined TikTok . List the results in comma separated format.
Tell me which sport of ice hockey or baseball these positions belong: outfielder, pitcher, left winger, forward, right fielder, goalie, catcher, third baseman, left defenseman
What’s the best way to cook scrambled eggs?
What is Schalke 04 famous for?
What is the smallest country in the world?
What is a tender?
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Mini, RAM
Why are cats better than dogs?
Who directed the episode of Game of Thrones where Jon Snow and Tormund Giantsbane go to ask the wildlings to settle beyond the Wall, but end up encountering White Walkers and the Night King?
Why are the New England Patriots the greatest NFL team ever?
From the passage identify the usage of Limestone. Display the results in a numbered list format.
reincarnation exists?
A farmer is on his way to market. He's going to sell a wolf, a goat, and a cabbage. On the way, he comes to a river crossing. The river is too wide to ford, so he has to take a tiny boat across. The boat is so small that he can take at most one of the three items with him in the boat at a time. Left alone, the wolf would devour the goat, and the goat would devour the cabbage. How can the farmer safely transport all three items across the river?
What should I look for when looking for a used car?
the first person was on the moon?
What magazine was Alex Prager the director of Photography for?
In music, what key is the relative minor to the key of B major?
Classify these countries as being in the northern hemisphere or the southern hemisphere: Brazil, India, Mexico, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Canada, United Kingdom
What is meditation?
Why do people love Air Jordan shoes
What are questions you can ask to get to know someone?
Is it possible to perform in local theater while also pursuing a demanding career?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Sif, Wonder Woman
Given the reference text about The Sun Also Rises, when was the book written and who wrote it?
Is Star Wars based on a book?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Claves, Rabeca
Provide a bulleted list of 5 key moments in Lyft's history
Where did the first limited-overs cricket match take place?
When was the Stansfeld's death
Is there an answer to the universe?
What are examples of famous plays written by William Shakespeare?
Where is Landscape Arch?
Can you list some of the most successful empires in History?
How are racial categories used historically?
Name some famous books on philosophy?
Who won the WNBA championship in 2018?
Where was his Catholic school?
Given this paragraph about the Ain Elzarga Wetland, why is this location one of the most important wetlands in the region?
What is bicycling and why would someone do it?  Is bicycling healthy and joyful or is it painful and a waste of time?  How many bicycles should you have?  Which part of the world do you find the most people bicycling?
Why do we have fences?
Given the reference text below, what is the official name of the church San Vincenzo?
What are the different towns that make up New England?
What caused the unprecedented five-game winning streak?
From the passage identify the sacred animals of Apollo. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Who wrote Howl's Moving Castle?
Are spicy foods healthy?
Write something you may never forget.
What is Barter?
I don't like how my coffee tastes. What are some reasons that the coffee I brew isn't good?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Igba, Berimbau
Who won the 2018 NHL Stanley Cup Finals?
Given a reference text about Friedrich Rudolf Ludwig Freiherr von Canitz, when and where was he born?
What was the Hundred Years War?
A 30-year-old member at your fitness center has been weight training for 4 months and claims to have made significant gains in strength. Twice a week, he performs 1 set of 12-15 repetitions using 8 weight machines. Over the last 6 weeks, he's noticed that he isn’t achieving the strength gains that he’s used to. How would you modify his training routine to optimize gains in muscular strength?
What does costco do?
Please tell me about burgundy wine
Why do people like the color green?
Who is Paulina Flores Arias
What are few things that could impact your EV range on long trips
5 ways animal communicate
Who is Eric Brewer? What is he known for?
List the names of several laundry detergent brands
What are common methods for processing coffee?
What class of locomotive was the No. 13?
Is Realpolitik diplomacy strategy based on pragmatism or idealism?
Why is Alien the greatest space horror film of all time?
What is the best way to earn money on the side?
I strongly believe in having a growth mindset and being a lifelong learner. However, I am a very busy person and I always find it hard to find time in the day to dedicate to educating myself on a variety of topics. I would love to read more, but I simply don't have the time to be able to do this today regularly. What are some ways that I can consume content to learn and exercise my mind, using the least amount of time as possible?
How well establish is the Cuban red-tailed hawk as a species?
List some of the best life changing self-help books
List some of the best surf breaks in California
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? She-Hulk, Wonder Woman
What are some of the best camping locations in Ontario, Canada?
Is there a way to prevent type 1 diabetes?
Why was the 2023 Women's NCAA basketball championship controversial?
What is the Scots word that The Pleasance is derived from?
List the 7 most recent US Speakers of the House (newest to oldest).
Given this paragraph about Mahatma Gandhi, can you tell me why did he go to London?
How is education in Singapore
Who is Stevie Wonder?
Who is the mercedes formula 1 team principal?
Which TV show from the 80s and 90s features a bar owned by a former baseball player?
What is the name of Baltimore Maryland's professional football team?
Who created the game of basketball?
Tell me whether the following countries are located in Europe, North America, South America, Africa, or Asia: France, Mexico, Peru, India, Nepal, Rwanda, Egypt, Portugal, Kenya, Argentina, Canada
What are the islands bathed by the Andfjorden fjord described on this paragraph?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dayereh, kumuz
Tell me about the Sukhoi-Gulfstream
What is the fastest car in the world?
What are the four ingredients for beer?
Based on this text, please list the members of the band Phish, separated by commas.
How many games did Edwin play in the NBA?
What is an optimisation problem?
What is the most important gear to bring for backpacking?
Given the below text, how many days did it take for Captain Lewis to sail the Borneo from Banjarmasin to Madras? Explain how you did this calculation
Given these paragraphs about Multiomics, what is a typical advantage of single-cell multiomics versus bulk analysis?
How to play chess
Give an introduction of Fairfax county in Virginia.
Classify each of the following a golf tournament or a tennis tournament: Masters, Dell Matchplay, PGA Championship, Wimbledon, Miami Open, French Open, Players Championship
Tell me which one of these is different than others - Football, Hockey, Basketball, Baseball, Cricket, Lacrosse.
Where did basketball originate?
Tell me whether these are cities in India: Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Sydney, New Delhi, Kolkota
What did Britain swap Havana for with Spain in 1763
What is the difference between a Narrow Transformation and Wide Transformation
From the given text, List me some important aspects of Gandhanahalli
Extract a comma separated list of places mentioned in this entry on the history of coffee
The latest Gold Medal was won by Neeraj Chopra in
Classify the below based on whether they are tree or animal.
Deer, Goat, Acacia, Banyan
What spots are the best spots to surf In the Bay Area?
What is Methode Traditionalle?
How do you install a wooden fence?
Give me a list of films in which Walter Whitman appeared while he was under the age of 60.
Where is Estonia?
Given this article, what is the largest size for a dead man zone?
Who are Industrial Light and Magic?
Who won the 2008 Democratic primary that Martin Connor competed in?
How do I train my dog to not pee in the house?
Which is a species of fish? Pearl or Pearlfish
Summarize the interesting points about Arc'teryx
what does it mean to have brunette hair?
What is ProSavin
find the country that had wars with Egypt, and country that formed an ally to Egypt
Classify each item in the list based on the following types of sport: team, individual, water, extreme.

List to classify: soccer (football), basketball, tennis, baseball, American football, golf, cricket, swimming.
Write an email to Visa alerting them that I am no longer interested in the position I’m interviewing for since I have accepted another offer. I have a lot of respect for the company and their employee experience is high!
At what age are children considered adults?
What is the plot of the movie The Quiet Family
What is The Hobbit?
Give me a list of 7 of the most popular Pokémon
What should you do if a black bear approaches you while you are hiking?
Who created the first chocolate bar?
What are 4 good reasons to get solar panels and a powerwall for my house?
How can I boost my energy levels throughout the day?
Why are so many NFL coaches related to each other?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Ferret, Northern bobwhite
Who is the best soccer player ?
How old was Stefan Richarz when he received his phD?
Who was the first female to swim the English Channel?
Give me the recipe for the traditional crepe
Does Delta Lake support multi-table transactions?
Do you know the species Etlingera diepenhorstii
What languages are generally spoken in Macau?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Where does paprika come from?
Write a witty paragraph about a chicken's thought process for crossing the road.
Given a reference text about Former Indian Prime Minister Shri P.V Narasimha Rao, tell me when they were born, when they were Prime Minister and their most significant accomplishments in office
What is a Series I-Bond?
How many rings on the Olympic flag
Classify the below natural satellites based on the planet. 
Titan, Europa, Moon, Ganymede
From the passage find spacecrafts which are manufactured by SpaceX. Display the results in comma separated format.
In which years did the Women's England cricket team win the world cup
Give me a bulleted list of ways to make my girlfriend happy on valentines day
Give me a comma separated list of factors that can cause Insulin oscillation.
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Llama, House cricket
How do I get from Singapore to San Francisco?
What is "Cien años de soledad"?
What is a car used for?
What is intermittent fasting and can it help?
Please describe the broad classes of Reinforcement Learning (RL) within Machine Learning and what problems they attempt to address.
Where was the first season of The X-Files filmed?
How to start a side hustle
Who is Pearl Jam?
How do you summarize a story?
Why is California the best state?
What years was the BMW 1M made?
Where is Rakaia Gorge located?
List 8 rarest minerals
what are the different ways to set up a stereo music system at home?
Given a reference text about Dunkirk, tell me what schools are located in the area.
Tell me whether each of these is red or brown: tomato, strawberry, raspberry, chocolate, coffee, almond
What are the different types of snowboarding styles?
Using the provided passage, provide a bulleted list of the areas most effected by climate change.
From the following passage, extract the device used to shoot this film.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Machaeroides, Red Panda
Which of the following are countries? Pakistan, Azerbaijan, Hodor, Chicago, St. Louis, Michael, Jordan, Minecraft, Ninja, Teletubbies, Fortnite, Lesotho, Greece
Tell me whether you wear each of the following on your hand or face: ring, glove, glasses, lipstick, mitten, mask
What is the colloquial term for LSD?
Classify each of the following as either a dog breed or cat breed: german shepherd, bulldog, labrador retriever, french bulldog, siberian husky, alaskan malamute, poodle, chihuahua, rottweiler, british shorthair, maine coon, persian, ragdoll, sphynx, american shorthair, birman, russian blue
I'm researching suburbs in the city of Brisbane. Please tell me which suburbs are north of the Brisbane River, and which are on the south. Annerley, Albion, West End, Kangaroo Point, Greenslopes, Windsor, Hamilton, Nundah, Cannon Hill, Kelvin Grove, Toowong, Milton
Given this paragraph about the origin of zero, in which century did it first make an appearance in India?
Provide me a 3 bulleted points summarizing the Los Angeles Lakers
Which of these are Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Leonardo, Guido, Shredder, Luca, Enzo, Maximiliano, Giulia, Donatello, Raphael, Diego, Pedro, Michelangelo, John
Qui était Clovis?
What is Palmitoyl-CoA?
What items do you need to buy in preparation for the arrival of a baby
Give me a list of herbs I can plant in my garden
Given a reference text about the history of Real Madrid Football Club, tell me the year it was founded and the name of its current stadium.
Who is the best shooter in the NBA?
Given this paragraph about Riot Games' history, which game was used an indication that games could be supported and monetized long-term?
Name the list of S&P 500 companies which as of August 31, 2022  accounted for 27.8% of the market capitalization of the index. List the results in comma separated format.
Given a reference text about twitter, how many accounts were estimated to be fake?
Where is Jon Rahm from?
Based on this information given, what groups combined to create the New JEWEL Movement, and on what date were they organized by which leader?
What problems can expansive soil cause?
Should I charge my phone if the battery is low?
Make me a list of cocktails I can order at the bar
Are these surfing terms or not? Nutted, pitted, drop in, shwabang, glass, poot, crest
How many types of serves exist in tennis?
Think up 4 different cities in California
Extract all the people and places from the following piece of texts: "The Hunger Games follows 16-year-old Katniss Everdeen, a girl from District 12 who volunteers for the 74th Hunger Games in place of her younger sister Primrose Everdeen. "
From the passage provided extract how many European and worldwide tittles Barcelona has won.
What is the difference between blanc de noirs and blanc de blancs champagne?
What is a good kids snack for school?
What are the various passing routes in football?
If the sky is the ocean then what is a bird?
Give me a list of some of the best films where English is not the primary language spoken. Please indicate which language is the primary language spoken.
What was the Long Night?
Write a brief passage arguing for wearing fanny packs when walking around town.
Identify the bird from the list: Butter, Bittern, Bitterness
What is the best University in Canada for computer Science?
What is so good about Japan?
Name some characters from the 2003 version of Battlestar Galactica.
Why is Spanish spoken in large parts of Latin America?
Based on this article, what countries have implemented the use of a dead man zone?
Categorize each of the following foods based on the five taste sensations (sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami).
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 most recent world cup winners and the location of the tournament
Give me a list with name suggestions for a white girl kitten that I just adopted.
What is the black oil on the TV show The X-Files?
Classify each of the following as a state or city: Portland, Austin, San Antonio, Alaska, Anchorage, Maine, Vermont
How can I do a figure skating toe loop jump?
What is the best way to travel across Japan as a foreign tourist staying on a tourist visa?
What is the best way to store passwords?
What is a landlord?
What is The Masters?
Roslyn is 36 years of age, weighs 74 kg, is 165 cm tall, and has 35% body fat. Her father had a heart attack at age 68 and her brother had an angioplasty at age 40. Both are living and well. Her blood chemistry values measure total cholesterol at 195 mg% and HDL cholesterol at 42 mg%. Her fasting blood sugar is 105 mg%. Roslyn is sedentary and has engaged in no endurance training program since college. Brainstorm an appropriate exercise training program to help Roslyn improve her C-R (cardiorespiratory) fitness. Be sure to calculate a target heart rate range with corresponding RPE.
Identify which of the following are members of House Targaryen or House Baratheon: Visenya, Aenar, Aegon, Aerys, Daenerys, Viserys, Orys, Argella, Robert, Steffon, Renly
When did Alia Bhatt get her first leading role?
What is the Mahatma Gandhi Marg (Allahabad)?
Tell me which of these are main characters from The X-Files: Fox Mulder, Mitch Pileggi, Dana Scully, Mully & Sculder, Frank Black, Peter Watts.
What's funny about the phrase "Why was Dumbo sad? He felt irrelephant."
What is a protractor?
What is Grimsthorpe?
what is machine learning meaning?
How to go on a road trip with kids?
What is the difference between a sedan and a coupe?
If you were going to learn how to play basketball, how would you do it?
What is Data Profiling?
Who is Jeffrey Archer?
Based on the paragraph below, what are some potential benefits of TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) treatment?
What's West High School located?
What is the hottest planet in the solar system?
Given a reference text about Putlacheruvu, how many canals are there and what are they used for?
Given a reference text about Tiger Woods, tell me when they were born, what their real first name is, and what profession his niece has.
Which rock star is known to consume heavy amounts of drugs and it surprising he has live this long?
What are the different ways I can open a jar whose lid is stuck and will not open?
Give me a list of songs to listen to with the artist for each song.
Summarize the important contributions of Thomas Edison from this paragraph in a bulleted list.
Who won the masters in golf in 2019?
Tell me which of these are types of desserts: flan, steak, tofu, broccoli, cookies, Cheetos, banana bread, ice cream, giblets, macaron, doughnut, a toothbrush
Which is a species of fish? Reedfish or Reed
Who are the five best basketball players in the history of the Boston Celtics?
what are the best tips for parenting?
Extract the location that the Kirtland's warbler lives in the winter.
What are some common types of high heel shoes?
What are some examples of frequently purchased essential oils?
Give me ideas of ways to add a spicy kick to my pho.
Is language our greatest invention  ?
Polly, a 51-year-old female, visits your fitness facility. She is dissatisfied with her body and is responding to a series of ads your facility uses to attract people interested in weight loss. Can we think of ways she can become more accepting of her body?
Extract the best known types of wood-decay fungi described in this paragraph and list them in a bulleted list.
What is a safe temperature for a hot bath?
Explain to me what a rainbow actually is?
What is kombucha?
What caused the great depression?
what is the latest top rate of income tax
Give me examples of birds that do not have the ability to fly.
Tell me the awards that Zhu won and the year that she won them in the following format: {Award}: {Year}
What is Matong
Which companies have the Paypal Mafia founded?
What team is the latest expansion in Major League Soccer?
What is the difference between cherry blossoms and plum blossoms?
I locked myself out of my apartment. Can you help me come up a few ways to get back in?
Where can I find Yukigassen tournaments?
What is the difference between an electric guitar and acoustic guitar?
Classify each of the following as either Mexican food or Vietnamese food: pho, tacos, spring rolls, bun bo hue, burritos, frijoles, banh mi, nachos
Why you need to be honest?
What is the difference between public and private schools?
What are some of the ways society can be improved?
Extract the beginning and ending term of António de Serpa Pimentel from the following text
What is Good Friday?
Which is a species of fish? Sturgeon or Surgeon
Who is the Aston Martin formula 1 team principal?
What type of democracy is Nigeria?
I have problems to connect to the remote service. How I could debug the networking issue?
Extract the names of the trophies given to the French Open singles champions and provide them in a bulleted list.
Classify the following people as primarily authors or primarily movie directors: Steven King, Steven Spielberg, N. K. Jemisin, Martin Scorsese, Jane Austen
Without quoting directly from the text, give me a summary of what the show "South Park" is about.
Given this paragraph, in which categories did Everything Everywhere All At Once win an Oscar and how many Academy Awards did the film win in total?
Should I pursue a PhD in STEM?
Is Nnedi Okorafor an American?
Which is a species of fish? Skate or Scooter
My heating bill is too high.  How can I lower it?  Give me three suggestions.
Do Harry Potter and Hermione get married?
Who is Romain Iannetta
What is an adverb?
Should I pursue a degree after graduating high school?
What is the Boone and Crockett Club?
Write a children's story about a baby called Arthur who weighed three times the normal weight for a boy his age
Was Dracula a real person.
Tell me which of these would be an instrument played in a Rock band: Drums, lawnmower, guitar, bicycle, bass, chair, keyboards
Why do you practice Kyokushin karate?
Which of the following are studio albums created by J. Cole: KOD, The Off-Season, Illmatic, Reasonable Doubt, The Eminem Show, Born Sinner
Which is a species of fish? Haddock or Polar
When talking about adjectives to describe proximity, which of these words fit into a 'near' category, and which are 'far'. Miles, close, neighbouring, distant, remote, adjacent, adjoining, outlying.
Given this paragraph about Selena Gomez, how many siblings does she have?
Explain away goal rule in soccer.
Who are el Marinid ?
How do you decide what type of bicycle to buy?
What are the sports that Kraft sponsors?
Classify each sports as either cardio, racket or team: running, biking, basketball, football, badminton, tennis, squash, swimming.
Given the paragraph about the Grateful Dead, tell me when they were founded, who were the original members, and what other members were in the group.
Is the glass ceiling real?
Given this paragraph about Pandora, what was the initial group name of Pandora musical group?
What is the best way to get back in shape when over 50 years of age?
How is Toshiyuki written?
Is it advisable to dress in costume for a musical theater audition?
FTX Crypto Cup Chess was played at
India with the world's highest TB burden, introduced the BCG mass immunisation in which year?
Who was the first president of the United States?
What are the common personality traits of cats?
What do you think of chewing gums?
List a few interesting ways to make a plant based Alfredo sauce.
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
Which famous Dutch dancer was convicted of being a spy for Germany during WW1
What are different types of grass?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Terror Bird, Narwhal
How to make an americano ?
Give a list of reasons I should get a dog.
What are some good body weight exercises for the upper body?
What does below SAS code do
PROC SUMMARY NWAY MISSING DATA=named_data;
		CLASS col1 col2 col3 col4;
		VAR tot_amt tot_gst_amt total_settlement_amt;
		OUTPUT OUT=PYMT_SUM(DROP=_:) SUM=;
	QUIT;
Why is Kylie Jenner famous?
Who is the winningest coach in Seattle Seahawks history?
Give me a list of science fiction books that every sci-fi fan should read.
Give me a list of white wine varieties I should try
When was Super Mario Kart launched?
Which parts do people train on the upper body?
How long was the longest slide in the Unilever Series?
Give me a list of the Avengers
Brainstorm reasons for and against taking a daily low-dose aspirin.
Provide a bulleted list of the seven best Science Fiction television shows
Give me the list of philosophers of science from before the 19th century
I just found out that my child has leukemia, what should I do?
What is a Peloton Bike
Extract the sources of electricity mentioned in the text and the percentage of electricity that comes from that source in Canada and list them using bullets in the format {Source} - {Percentage}
What is the distinction between skiing and backcountry skiing?
Why did the population expand in Seattle in the 2000s?
What are the largest hotel chains in the United States?
From the passage provided, extract the age at which Taylor Swift moved to Nashville
What is Ramadan?
What is the best hand in poker?
Give me a list of the top six premier league football clubs
Segregate the below numbers as palindrome or not.
1001, 202, 11, 65, 76, 36, 88, 999, 12345
What color is the Lethata dispersa?
Write a review of Carlos Ruiz Zafon's book The Shadow of the Wind
Why is Virginia City famous?
Are you going for a walk today?
Which hosts Wikipedia ?
What is a mitochondrial matrix?
Based on this excerpt, what are the main topological elements of Seattle, Washington?
Which of the following surnames have appeared on the Wimbledon Men's Championship trophy in the last sixty years? Federer, Djokovic, Navratilova, Connors, Borg, McEnroe, Becker, Laver, Evert, Court, Nastase, Sullivan, Leconte, Bahrami.
What are good native plants for a garden in Ohio?
Which industry is the top industry in Gabon's economy?
Which of these titles are by Nicola Yoon and which are by Angie Thomas: Everything, Everything, The Sun is Also a Star, Blackout, Instructions for Dancing, The Hate U Give, On the Come  Up, Concrete Rose
What was significant about the 1972 United States presidential election in Missouri
Give me a list of things to do when I feel cold
Given this passage about the human heart, tell me about the major structural features of the human heart as well as the primary purpose of the organ.
Where is Pompeii located?
List all the people mentioned in this paragraph on the history of Unix
Which of the tree species mentioned in the text are used as a source of food for humans?
What are books are available to get an understanding of California prior to the gold-rush of 1849?
Who is the biggest inspiration in your life?
If you were given 1 million dollars in your fidelity account provide a list of which stocks you would buy
Based on the following passage, what are the environmental consequences of fracking?
Do you recommend playing Dr. Mercy who is also called Swiss doctor Angela Ziegler to support your Chinese teammates in Overwatch ?
Please summarize from this text what were the main reasons Czech people immigrated to Texas.
What did Gary C. Butler do?
List the ingredients used to make a mojito in a bulleted list.
What do you think about Lake Tahoe as a destination to rent a cabin either for summer or winter?
What is a Balance sheet?
Extract the locations where McEwan lived as a child and list them using bullets.
Given the list below, extract the heroes' names, ages, and who voices them, in the format {Hero name} ({age in digits}) - {voiced by name}. Separate them by a newline.
Who will win the women’s final four matchup between Iowa and South Carolina?
What happened at the 1947 Amateur World Series
What the best way to give a dog a bath?
Write the first paragraph of a post from an alum describing the appeal of attending UC Berkeley for an undergraduate degree.
Based on the above passage name the regions which is at the North border of Saudi Arabia . Display the results in a comma separated format.
Tell me a joke involving a bird native to Antarctica.
Extract some details about the company Body Shop International Limited from the given text
What is a triathlon?
In what language do multilingual people dream?
Who first used the term "glass ceiling"?
List down some points on well the movie Oasis of the Zombies was perceived after launch
A group of parents is upset about the school lunch menu. Some are concerned that there are too many processed foods, not enough whole grains, and too much-canned fruit instead of fresh fruit. How would you approach this dilemma?
Give me few tips on  how not to drive a car?
Based on this paragraph about dogs, what is a companion dog?
What were the primary motivations for the Dual Alliance?
I'm going on a hike and the weather is cold, how should I dress?
How many toes do polydactyl cats have?
Give me a list of 5 cool starter projects a student new to computer programming could have fun making.
Who is the founder of the I Liq Chuan martial art?
Tell me whether these countries belong to the EU or not: Greece, United Kingdom, Turkey, Ukraine, France, Italy, Spain
Classify each of the following into either a solid, liquid or gas: blood, xenon, gold, wood, neon, brick, milk, xenon, coffee, gases, helium
Given these paragraphs about Natural hydrogen, what is it?
Where does College Avenue begin and end in Berkeley, CA?
Who won the San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Cinematography in 2012?
Give me a list of the 10 closest airports to San Francisco ?
Name the place where Queen Elizabeth II is buried
Write about apple
Steps to apply LLM & Other Law Programs
What is TIDB
When did mountain biking start?
Name some of the top basketball players
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Falcon, Hawkman
why is context switching bad for computer performance?
Tell me whether each of these countries is in the northern or southern hemisphere: Italy, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden
Write the introduction to a story about a rocket ship on its way to a distant galaxy
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narendra_Modi#Public_perception_and_image
Determine which continent the following cities are located: London, Singapore, New York, Sao Paulo, Buenos Aires, Melbourne, Jakarta, Boston, Paris, Riyadh, Lagos, Casablanca, Toronto, and Berlin.
Are electric vehicles better for the environment than cars powered by fossil fuels?
What are the best Japanese RPGs to try out?
From the passage provided, extract the entities which bestowed an award on Jensen Huang.
Which day is the hardest for crossword puzzles?
Extract what Operating systems openRA supports from the below text and list them in a seperate line
Based on the following passage summarize the history of grape cultivation and use of raisins.
Which one among the following three words is different to the others: Imaginative, astounding, incredible? Why?
Why do humans seek meaning in their lives?
What is the Couple's Retreat Garden?
What are some examples of low-flow fixtures?
Give me some examples of metamorphic rocks.
How many Anglo-Dutch wars were there?
What is Anandapuram mandal
Give me a brief synopsis of Larry David’s contribution to Seinfeld based on the text.
What are some of the easiest house plants to take care of?
What should I do if I consume a household cleaner?
What is Nasdaq?
How many strings does a cello have?
How does UIUC relate to PayPal?
Tell me five ways to build relationships with my neighbors.
Given a reference text about Isabel Emily Jay, tell me where she studied and how old she was when she retired.
According to this paragraph about UVA, tell me how much of UVA's academic budget foes to endowment and gifts?
Why do people believe in God
Summarise me a history of the Aches National Park creation
What is an ATV?
Classify each of the following transportation options as "Mass Transportation" or "Individual Transportation": car, bike, subway, train, tram, motorcycle, scooter
How did Frederic Hudson start working at the Herald?
Who are the greatest leg spinners in cricket history?
Which cities can I visit on the west coast of Australia?
Classify each of the numbers as prime or composite - 1, 2, 3, 10, 15
Suggest some sports I can do solo?
what is more soothing - greenery or water bodies
Is Bristol a large city
What is ADSL?
Based on the above information, provide the real names of the cast in the American television sitcom Friends. Separate the names using a comma. Also provide the date when the series finale was aired. Provide the date in MM/DD/YYYY format.
Who are the big six in EPL?
Who directed the Lost in Translation movie?
What is the 24 hour equivalent to 2PM?
Can we move away from fossil fuels in the next decade  ?
What causes revenue to decline?
From this paragraph about Microsoft, extract the names of the Big Five American information technology companies.
Classify the plants based on the pollination method.
Magnolias, water lilies, Vallisneria, Zostera
Give me a route based on 3 national parks that I can visit on a road trip from Salt Lake City
Why are weddings so expensive?
What are some hobbies that I can try that have a relatively low cost to start?
How long was the Nazi German battleship Bismarck active during WWII?
What are the primary caused of fever?
Robin Williams dressed in drag for which 1993 film
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Thappu, Tati
Please give me a short bulleted list of the key arguments the Shohei Ohtani in his career.
Give me the list of top 10 movies of all time, by IMDB rating. Format: Title (Release Date) Rating
Where is Meherpur Sadar
From the passage provided, extract the major cities in Telangana. Separate them with a comma.
Classify the below items based on who owns them. Google or Microsoft.
Bard, ChatGPT, Chrome, Bing
Given this paragraph about the town of Birkenhead, what the does the name Birkenhead probably mean?
Write a paragraph on how cricket format has evolved over time
What is a noun?
What is the difference between a fire fighter and a nurse?
How many basketball teams are in NBA?
How can I be more productive?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Fancy rat, Sugar glider
How do you get good at a hobby?
What type of pokemon should I use to battle a water pokemon? Give me some examples.
What are some modes of transportation I can use to travel downtown?
What is a vegetarian diet?
How do you play chess?
Who landed on Timor Island after being cast adrift
Where is Black Oak?
How many and which states were US Colonies?
Give me four ideas for my 7 year old daughters birthday party
What is Southern Charm the TV Show?
Things to consider when applying for a new job...
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wissam_Ben_Yedder#Club
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Yak, Mute swan
If you are about to be admitted to the hospital overnight, categorize each of the following as either useful or not useful: a phone charger, a camping tent, reading glasses, a cruise ship, 10 bags of lumpy cement, a favorite blanket, and headphones, and a grand piano.
The movie Marquise of Armiani
What is the powerhouse of the cell?
Who was the founder of the Methodist Church?
What are some steps I can take to switch into a career in technology or computer programming?
Which is a species of fish? Treefish or Tree
Extract the awards won by Tendulkar. Separate them with a comma
Which one among the following three words is different to the others: Novelty, Playful, Irresistible? Why?
What was the impact of Citizens United vs FEC on the impact of corporations funding politicians in the United States?
Why should I use EKS over ECS?
Kingsway in India was made in the honour of
What is the largest of the North American Great Lakes?
Who is Enrique Jorrín?
What was the first name of the city that became Austin, Texas?
Give me some ideas on where to travel for good sun and beaches.
Given this paragraph about British Shorthairs, what are the typical characteristics of this cat breed's temperament?
who is a feminist writer : simone de beauvoir, simone veil, virginia woolf, Gisèle halimi, Voltaire, Marquis de Sade
Write a grocery list of typical items a person might get from the grocery store.
Order the following animals in terms of average weight: finch, elephant, goat, gazelle, and a rabbit.
Given this paragraph that describes the country of Peru, what is its population size?
What is the most common air or gas mixture used in recreational scuba diving.
How does a person get new hobbies once they are older?
How do you get a six pack?
Which dynasties rules in Morocco ?
What cocktail contributed to the rise of vodka in America?
Which of these numbers are odd? 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8
What is Azure HDInsight?
What are the origins or surfing in California?
Although Chicago isn't located on either coast of the United States, what factors continue to contribute to its economic success?
When Aegon the Conqueror took over Westeros, which great house of the Reach became extinct as a result?
What wines are made in Napa Valley?
Classify each of these as a toy for a dog or a cat: ball, laser, bone, mouse, frisbee, catnip
Give me a list of the usual accompaniments that are served with Peking duck
What is a debit card?
What are the pros and cons of working from home?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tamborim, Veena
Which is a species of fish? Blenny or Benny
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Great White Shark, Patagotitan
What is single-cell sequencing?
what are different types of phrases
Based on this text, extract the characters Farley performed in a bulleted list.
Given this paragraph about a country, what is the most populous Spanish-speaking country?
What institutions make up the Ivy League?
What are some of the best fantasy novels of all time?
Why is Stephen Curry the best player in the NBA?
What are seven different sources of protein that vegetarians can eat?
I've started doing individual training to get fit and now I'd like to learn a team sport, which of these are team sports? hockey, yoga, baseball, basketball, netball, running, handball, weightlifting, and ballet.
Extract the teams that Ayrton Senna raced during his Formula One career. Separate them with a comma.
Which NFL teams have gone to the Super Bowl at least once but have never won a Super Bowl title?
What is the oldest incorporated academy in the united states, with multiple u.s. presidents as alumni?
Why Bengalis are famous for
What does it mean for a function to be computable?
Write a whimsical and funny horoscope reading that makes a baseball reference
What are some common mushrooms used in cooking?
Tell me whether these are assets or liabilities: Cash, Accounts Receivables, Deferred Commissions, Prepaid Expenses, Long-term Investments, Property Plant & Equipment, Operating lease right-of-use assets, Goodwill, Intangible Assets, Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenses, Operating Lease Liabilities, Deferred Revenue
Who is the singer in Bon Iver?
Given this paragraph about South Korea, which body of water forms the country's western border and which body of water borders it's eastern border?
Who created Final Fantasy?
From the passage identify the type of medications used to treat infections. Display the results in comma separated format.
Given the paragraph around Star Trek starships, which is the fastest.
Based on this paragraph about dogs, what is a French Bulldog?
How is data engineering different from data science?
What are some common peer-to-peer money transfer apps in the United States?
How do you train for a half marathon?
The classis horror the Shining exterior shots were shot at this location:
Who was the first United States president to be indicted in court in the State of New York
Where was the 11th BRICS held?
What is following the file format Delta Lake follows to write records? CSV, JSON, PARQUET, AVRO, ORC
What is the most dangerous motorcycle race in the world?
Does parallel universe really exist?
What are some best practices to keep car tires from losing tread prematurely
What is Football?
Extract the steps to resolve a given supervised machine learning problem from the following text
What is the best time of the year to visit Paris?
What makes plants grow faster?
Who where the San Diego Stingrays
How far did Oskar Dillon kick in the winning goal at the NPL Queensland championship?
What is the depth of focus of a camera?
What some ways you can cook a steak?
How do you tell a story with data?
What architecture does GPT use?
What is the volume of a rectangular prism
Name five surf spots on the North Shore of Oahu in Hawaii
What is an LCR circuit?
Which of these items are clothing brands and which are banks: Levi’s, Gap, Goldman Sachs,  Banana Republic, JP Morgan Chase, Seven, and Guess.
What is "Six Feet Under"?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Silver Surfer, Martian Manhunter
Classify each of these as either motorcycle brands or car brands: Maruti Suzuki, Ducati, Triumph, Royal Enfield, Harley Davidson,  Mahindra, Tata, Skoda, Honda, Toyota, Hero, TVS, Yamaha, Suzuki, Kawasaki, Volkswagen, Ferrari, Lamborgini, Volvo, Rolls royce, Bajaj, Kia, Hyundai, Ford, Chevrolet, Crystler, Fiat, Hummer, Citreon, KTM
Who won the Men's Madison at the 2018 UCI Track Cycling World Championships?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tumdak, Tati
How long did the Henry Holst String Quartet last with its original group of members based on this text? Explain your work.
Tell me more about congratulatory message.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Beesbury?
Based on the provided passage, extract the main reason that the Rocky Mountain Locust went extinct.
Angelo Scicilano better know as who
What is Debezium?
Did Elon Musk create Tesla
Given this paragraph on Mercury-Redstone 1, how many people were on the MR-1 when the launched failed, and when was the launch?
How did George II die
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Singing bowl, Kibangala
What is Angular?
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: gallon, litre
Write the synopsis for a spy thriller book.  The story should a team of experts in many various domains of science and technology, all working together to solve a potential global crisis.  Leave the synopsis with a cliff-hanger question.
Tell me which Taylor Swift album these songs are from: Love Story, Bad Blood, Begin Again, Cornelia Street.
Tell me whether these cities are in Spain or France: Pamplona, Valencia, Nice, Marseille, Paris, Sevilla
Extract the names of the teams Bennie John Reiges was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
How many cycling world championships has Peter Sagan won?
When was Franz Kafka born and who was he?
From this paragraph about Taylor Swift, how many AMAs has she won.
Write a letter I can send to the company that installed my swimming pool. Explain to them that the pool has two leaks and that I'd like to make a warranty claim. Request a reply within the next 30 days.
Write me a text to someone I work with asking them to cover my shift because I got sick. Use a polite tone.
What artists made up the supergroup The Traveling Wilburys?
Classify each of these as a type of instrument or a type of school subject: Mathematics, Saxophone, french horn, history, physical education, Oboe, science, drums, geography, flute, tuba
What are the strongest mobs in the online game called Minecraft?
What were the key points of the Treaty of Versailles?
Which of the following is a type of pasta: lasagna, sushi, or burrito?
Given this paragraph about marathon, what is the distance covered in kilometres and what are the most common ways to complete one?
Based on the following passage what is the more dominant force in the universe?
What is the answer to two plus two
Extract all the names of people that Betty worked with from the text.
What is discrete manufacturing?
Classify each of the following as being related to Google or Microsoft: Xbox, Waymo, Surface Pro, Youtube, Bing, Chrome
which countries has the most diverse food?
How is Japan written in Japanese?
What are six different corporations with orange logos?
What's the relationship of Chinese and Japanese
To which family belongs the Caltha scaposa
What is the great depression?
What is a quark?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Guitaro, Tromboon
How many days is enough to vacation in Belgium?
Tell me whether these are alcoholic drinks or non-alcoholic drinks: soda, wine, milk, beer, fruit juice, sparkling water, vodka, tequila
What is the difference between alligator and a crocodile
What is Caracas?
What is one of the first recorded mentions of the sauna in Finnish literature?
Write a fairly boring short story about making coffee in the morning.
Tell me whether these are movies or books: Jurassic, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, Angels and Demons
What is the Rogue Fitness suitecase challenge?
What creates moon phases and how is it different from an eclipse?
What is the plot of the movie above suspicion
What are some important devices you would see in a kitchen? And what are they used for?
Classify the following numbers as 'odd' or 'even' - 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Why do kids love peppa pig?
What is flying trapeze?
Write a press release declaring the availability of IronChef, a cooking robot that can create various dishes in 5 cuisines. Be sure to mention some of its advanced technological features.
What kind of animal is the Iolaus crawshayi
Is it possible to live life without having to use a door?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Repenomamus, Jaguar
What is a Delta Lake?
Who is LaVelle Smith Jr.?
Describe a trip to Tokyo. What should I be prepared for? What should I eat? Any can't-miss attractions?
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: ounce, gram
Give me a list of the five famous things to see in Nepal
Why do cloud service providers need to be FedRAMP authorized if they want to do business with U.S. federal agencies?
Which is a species of fish? Soldierfish or Soldier Boy
When is an object considered a planet?
Pulitzer Prize 2022 was given for the coverage of the
Give me a brief summary of the spanish civil war
Who designed the South African Class 15E 4-8-2 locomotive?
What are all the positions in hockey?
List all the planets in our solar system with more than one moon.
How many times did Jorge compete in the Olympics?
What are easy desserts I can make at home?
What is the difference between acoustic and classical guitar?
Who is Tina Turner
Write a friendly, convincing e-mail to my landlord asking whether I can get a dog.
Tell me if these teams are in or out of the NBA Playoffs for this year, Orlando Magic, Detroit Pistons, Boston Celtics, Dallas Mavericks, and Phoenix Suns
What are financial services?
Given this passage from wikipedia about the attributes of Japanese Anime, summarize the key differences between Japanese anime and other forms of animation
Given these paragraphs about battery storage power stations, what was the levelized cost of electricity from battery storage as of 2020?
Q: How can I prevent COVID-19?
Where are Vermeer's paintings set
The quit India movement is also known as
How do you jump start a car?
Based on the following passage in which months of the year are storms most common in the North Indian basin?
What is the best way to talk to a teenager about sex
Where can I buy leather pants for women?
What was the duration of the Lewis and Clark Expedition?
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Fiat, Dodge
How does on prepare for interviews at consulting firms?
Where did Christopher Columbus sail his ship when he discovered America?
What are the benefits of a water rower machine?
How do you cook beef short ribs?
Make me a list of the oldest board games that I might not know about, and where they were invented.
Suggest some action movies I can watch?
What is a mainframe?
Can you tell me about the Chicago Blackhawks?
What is elite shungite?
What is the Sun?
Is Gillian Anderson an English actress?
How do you make a good cappuccino?
What are some good date ideas for vegans?
What is the difference between the Scala Future onComplete and andThen functions?
Give me a list of the five best selling consoles of all time with amount of units sold
How old is the Earth?
What were the first ten states to enter the union of the United States?
Give me a list of the best breakfast foods I've never tried
What is a clique in graph theory?
Based on this passage, please extract a bulleted list of the factors of GPU's constructions that enter into the performance of the card for real-time rendering.
What is the official bird of the State of Hawaii?
What are some top ski resorts to visit if I live in SF bay area?
Given the following paragraph about Latin Text, what does "Dona nobis pacem" mean in English?
What is the best way to respond to proposed edits in a contract?
What is Gobekli Tepe?
Does a Tesla work well in Michigan?
Extract who developed Age of Empires 2 and the year it was released from the following text and separate them with a comma
what is philosophy?
Extract 3 areas based on the following passage where electronics is widely used.
Who is Osama bin Laden?
Classify each of the following as an instrument or tool: screw driver, guitar, trumpet, chisel, tuba, wrench
List the three first books written by Dan Brown, in chronological order and bullet point, using the format {book title} ({year published})
What are your three favorite Martin Scorsese  films
How much has the population of Puerto Rico been growing?
In computer science, where did the term big-endian originate?
What is Barbacoa?
What was Goff's best game mentioned in the text?
From the given text, Write some important points about song "Sunshine, Lollipops and Rainbows"
Based on this passage, please extract the names of the countries where TSMC has semiconductor fabrication (or "fab") facilities and separate them by commas.
Where can set theory be applied?
What is a tri-state area?
here is a blurb about the 98th Illinois General Assembly, what were the notable laws that were passed?
When did Hawaii become a state?
Which country won the most recent soccer world cup?
Are these hockey or baseball teams: Red Wings, Padres, Blues, Capitals
What are the primary benefits of sending my child to daycare?
Tell me whether these animals are domesticated or not domesticated: cats, sheep, bald eagle, whale, dog, bat
What is so fragile that saying its name breaks it?
Where did Anne Frank live after her family fled Germany?
What is separation anxiety in dogs?
What is the largest living thing?
What are some examples of countries to visit for an amazing culinary experience?
List the club sports teams that Neumann University has
Bikes are very diverse and have different geometries based on your riding styles. For example a road bike will have a forward leaning geometry and a mountain bike will be more upright. Furthermore you will consider the components and parts that are worth paying for. Bikes can be really expensive for features you may or may not use. Consider buying a base frame with the right geometry and then customizing parts like shocks or handlebars for your specific needs. There are many brands that carry stock frames and demoing a few will really help you understand the one that works for your body structure and application.
Based on the reference text about McDonalds, tell me what year it was founded, how many daily customers they have, and their best selling product.
How do formula one cars generate downforce?
List the five most important quick keys on a PC
How can we cool the planet?
Please summarize the main argument of this paragraph from Woodrow Wilson's speech to Congress asking them to declare war on Germany.
Why kids ask more questions?
write a linkedin informal message asking to an existing company employee for tips and guidelines for the specific role in their company. It should not be direct. Also ask about there experience or journey. and how to prepare to crack the exam and interview. It should be short.
Why is baseball called America's Pastime?
What is the best place to visit in Greece
What are some words that rhyme with orange
Which is a species of fish? Finger or Fingerfish
What are some of the best Sports Movies of all time?
Given this summary of the movie Short Circuit, how can we conclude that what happened to number 5 was truly a miracle of life that manifested sentience, rather than a computer malfunction?
is a career in enterprise software a good was to go?
Boiling water is 100 degree in celsius, is that an obtuse angle?
Why is Utah a great place to visit?
Why Rafael Nadal succeeds on clay?
When was Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj born?
Tell me 5 best Tom Hanks movies of all time.
What position is best to use in your Fantasy Football flex slot?
Write a short story about a little girl that saves her neighbors home from a bee infestation.
Which of the following car brands produce electric vehicles: Toyota, Tesla, and Ford. List the models that are electric.
What are some ways that I can conserve water at home?
Give me a list of the greatest basketball players of all time.
How do I travel from SF to Aspen ski resorts?
What is pair skating, Can you help identify some key points from the give text?
Which cryptography libraries support SHA-2?
What was Canon EOS DCS 1 resolution?
Name some of the bravolebrities from Southern Charm
What are some edible weeds that grow well in Maryland?
how to express love without saying it out loud?
Name some of the popular gaming consoles in the 2020s
Where does the suburb of Rozelle's name come from?
Do you prefer a Tesla model S or a Porsche Taycan
What is Apache Kafka?
How do I make great espresso?
According to Greek mythology, who was the first woman on earth?
Who is the Greatest male Tennis player of all time?
When was Lee Kuan Yew born and when did he rule as the Prime Minister of Singapore?
Where has the word ciao originated
Based on the paragraph below, which are the most and least popular National Parks in the US?
Give me some ideas for a gender reveal
What is graph theory?
Given a reference text about the Salt River, tell me how long the river is and where it starts and finishes.
List all the aspiring members of NATO.
We are going to the zoo and need you to tell us which animals belong in which section. The animals are alligator, bald eagle, elephant, hippopotamus, camel, frog, penguin, and zebra. The sections are amphibians, birds, mammals, and reptiles.
How does one get accepted into a United States federal academy like West Point.
Why do people like macaroni and cheese and how is it made?
From the text below, tell me where Mount Balinhard got its name.
Who was Lionel Danthanarayana ?
In 1961 which Henry Mancini record won Grammy record of year
Which city will host the 2024 Summer Olympics?
What are some of the top places to visit in Switzerland?
Based on this paragraph about the Ming treasure voyages, who commanded the fleet?
What is MGMT's most popular album
What should you pay attention to when buying a house?
Can you castle if the rook previously moved
Given this paragraph about Jiu-Jitsu, who taught Carlos Gracie.
Who formed the rock group One Day as a Lion?
What is the standard tuning of an electric guitar?
What was the Tower Chowk renamed?
Classify each of the following as either ski gear or swim gear: fins, pull buoy, bib, bindings, gloves, kickboard, neck gator, boots, and parka.
How to survive the zombie apocalypse ?
From the passage provided, extract the different bordering regions to Southeast Asia
Which of the following are periodic elements: Ti, N, Pt, Fl, Zt, 1L, 2y, O, F, V, Y
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Ford, Higer
How can I ensure exactly-once delivery when reading data from Kafka with Spark?
What is Herd Immunity?
Given a reference text about Philip, Duke of Parma, who were his parents?
Which of the following are continents: Asia, Africa, China, Australia, United States of America, North America, Sri Lanka, Thailand.
Which of the following animals is a marsupial: kangaroo, zebra, or elephant?
What was the first Pink Floyd album
Which of these are helpful for starting a fire and which are better for putting out a fire: water, dirt, matches, dry newspaper, sticks, charcoal lighter fluid, and human pee.
How has the designated hitter role affected baseball players' careers?
Why is Boston a great city?
Tell me whether these are names of basketball teams or baseball teams: Los Angeles Lakers, Los Angeles Angels, Los Angeles Dodgers, Los Angeles Clippers, San Diego Padres, New York Yankees, Miami Heat, Boston Celtics
What does ROYGBIV stand for?
What are a few uses of pot (THC) gummies?
Write me an introductory email to a lawyer to represent me in court for a red light ticket I did not deserve
What is it like to live in Arizona?
Who was the first African American to go to space?
Who won the National Championship for Men's Basketball in 2023?
Give me the best books wrote by Machado de Assis
Given this text about the Major League Baseball, where do Major League Baseball teams play spring training games and why.
What is the Canada's national sport?
Who is the best actor in the world
Extract the species of coffee from the text. Separate them with a semi-colon
What are the first six things I have to do in order to build a house?
Who wrote Jane Eyre?
Give me a list of different berries that I could put in a smoothie
Is the killers a band
How do beaver damns benefit the environment?
Who is Carl Rimmer
Given this paragraph about stainless steel, which of the two series contains the most nickel content?
How are you doing today?
Write a convincing argument about why cats are better than dogs
What band sings the song "My Own Worst Enemy"?
What is a fixed-rate mortgage (FRM)?
Football or soccer?
Which is the most visited country in the world?
How Can I become a Referee?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Yuka, Molo
How many Presidential Medals of Freedom recipients did John Fitzgerald Kennedy choose?
Given this paragraph about roasting peanuts to make peanut butter, what temperature are peanuts roasted using the batch method in celsius?
What is The Netherlands?
What about the battle of Salamis (fought in 480 BC), do many historians believe make it one of the most significant battles of human history?
Who is the Ferrari formula 1 team principal?
Who is Madonna?
Classify each of the following as something you sit on or stand on: chair, couch, paddle board, skateboard, sofa, skis
What are some good date ideas?
Why is a meme compared to a gene?
Give me a list of some excellent 5 VPN services
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of extra fingers?
What are some fashion ideas that haven't been done before?
Classify each of the following country as either a left hand traffic or a right hand traffic based on which side of the road traffic moves: USA, Spain, UK, India, Singapore, Switzerland, Australia, Egypt, France, Italy
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tumba, Villu Paatu
Which clef does a viola use?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Stark?
What activities an admin or an administrator of any data tools & platform or data tools can do?
How does the rational choice model help us understand the willingness of an individual to vote as well as whom she/he will vote for?
Give a bullet point list of all the names mentioned in this included paragraph.
How many parts did O.J.: Made in America have, and could a documentary with the same length win an Oscar today?
When did India get Independence?
Given this paragraph, in what part of England does the River Thames flow, and what is its length in kilometres?
Given the following paragraph on gene regulation, what are operons and where do they occur?
What are some cardio machines at the gym?
From the information below, extract the date the Battle of Entebbe took place.
What is the difference between oxfords and derbys?
How many squares does a chessboard have?
In what state is Yosemite located?
What are the Olympic light weight events.
Tell me some children's songs that I might use for a class.
How does the sun sustain life on earth?
Given the following information about the speed of light:
Speed of light in vacuum which has a refractive index of 1 is 300Km/sec
Speed of light in water which has a refractive index of 1.3 is 225Km/sec
Speed of light in diamond which has a refractive index of 2.4 is 125Km/sec

Estimate the speed of light in glass which has a refractive index of 1.5
What is veganism?
Of the following, which are car parts, which are boat parts and which are both: tires, propeller, engine, rudder, sail, seat belts, head lights, and rear view mirrors.
Please give me a short summary of the critical response received by Season 1 of the Apple TV Series "Ted Lasso"
What type of mouse do you use with a mac
When did King Charles II return to Navarre?
Extract a bullet point list in the format {movie} ({date}) from the life of director Quentin Tarantino
How good as a pianist is Yeol Eum Son
Toronto Maple Leafs is a team in the NHL. Who was their captain and star player in the early 2000s?
Extract what factions fight in the video game Command & Conquer: Red Alert
What is a topographical unique feature of the area around Austin Texas.
Classify each of the following workouts as upper body or lower body: bench press, pull-up, squat, rows, leg extension, calf raise
Who was Alexander the Great?
What are some popular social media applications?
Is California a great place to live?
From the passage provided, extract the total corporate debt of Adani group
Which country has the largest landmass?
What is a security in finance?
Who is the Buhler Group
Extract and list the Barcelona players in the passage that came from the club's youth academy
Write a review of Last Argument of Kings by Joe Abercrombie
Which family of moth does the Euxoa brevipennis belong to?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ratchet, Hasapi
What is Ontology?
Can you please help me with a couple of points about analgesic drug, with the given text as a reference.
Tell me which of these teams are in the National Football League (NFL): Seattle Seahawks, San Francisco 49ers, Seattle Mariners, Seattle Super Sonics, New England Patriots.
Please give me 3 reasons why Ronaldo is the best player in the world from this text
Which of these flowers are annuals vs perennials: Petunias, Verbena, Alyssum, Zinnias, Digitalis Dalmatian, Amsonia, Clementine, Peonies.
How long can you store cooked food in refrigerators?
What is the net worth of one of Taylor Swift's cats?
why pluto is not a planet?
Based on the reference text, who won the men's 2022 FIFA World Cup and where was it located?
Why should I watch ice hockey
Who are the Green Bay Packers and who owns them?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rototom, Mugni
What makes sourdough special?
What is a head rowing race?
Why does treasury bond price drop when bond yield increases?
Why should we not allow dye in our food products?
Classify the below based on whether continent or ocean-
Asia, Africa, North America, Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic, South America, Antarctica, Europe, Australia
Classify each of the following as either caloric or low-fat products: butter, turnips, oils, salad dressings, spinach, sugar, water, nuts, seeds, dry bread, zucchini, strawberries, dry cereal, crackers, tomatoes, egg yolk, avocado, dried fruit, ananas, red meat, pizza, salmon, ketchup, watermelon
Name some players on the Golden State Warriors basketball team.
Classify the following movies as either Comedy or Horror: Weekend at Bernie's, Scream, What Lies Beneath, Happy Gilmore, Cujo, Billy Madison, Kingpin, Carrie, Halloween, Encino Man, Misery
Find the bird in this list: Shark, Dog, Arctic tern
What are some places to visit in Anchorage?
Who planted the first wine vineyard at California's Mission San Juan Capistrano?
What temperature can I expect at the summit if I climb Mount Kinabalu
What are some ideas for businesses that cater to millennials?
Using examples taken from the text give me a summary of why the Boston Marathon is well known.
How large is a regulation size basketball in the NBA?
What is MATLAB?
Extract from the text the name of the movie in which Matilde Ciccia had a role
Could you provide some recommendations for restaurants in Yountville?
What are some comfort food style breakfasts that include eggs?
In the following passage, replace Tallinn with Helsinki and Estonian with Finland.
Let's make a targeted list of banks located in New York City
The Award Palme d’or was given to whom?
what is a sql query?
What are the other examples of Colour Revolutions?
what is hinduism
Who was the 27th president of the United States of America?
Based on the paragraph below, what bone was used to estimate the height of William the Conquerer?
Who wrote Mahabharata?
Is Microsoft a FAANG stock?
What is Pythagorean or Pythagoras' Theorem
What are the names of Tata trusts which Ratan Tata heads?
Where is the best place to work in my house?
Name five MLB teams in the American League.
Give me a list of the subjects I need to learn to become a telecommunication engineer
Think up some openings for beginners to the game of Chess
Which year was quantum computer demonstrated to be possible?
Create a bulleted list of all the Jurassic Park movies.
Identify the bird from the list: Shrimp, Barnacle goose, Polar Bear
What do you think a conversation between two AI bots would look like?
3 Best TV series in the World
How much PVC produced each year?
Using examples from the text give me a rundown of the causes of wet snow avalanches.
What age would a child become a tween?
is finance a great career
What are Roland's most famous synthesizers and drum machines from the 1980s and what do they do?
What is the main tax-related difference between a brokerage account and an IRA ?
When do schools close for summer vacation in Cameroon and Nigeria?
What is the GE Dash 8-32BWH
Please tell me who Bishop Patrick MacMullan was and when he died.
Tell me which of the following are NBA teams: Knicks, Thunder, Kings, Lizards, Sparrows, Hawks, Warriors, Gladiators.
Which national park is hardest to visit?
What is the difference between coalesce and repartition when it comes to shuffle partitions in spark
Give me a list of the only two American cyclists to win the Tour de France general classification.
How do UK telephone numbers work?
What does WHO refer to?
Given this paragraph about Dill Records, tell me when the group made CDs and who started the record label.
What are the debt securities?
Can I learn to ski as an adult?
Given a reference text, who is the Ryder Cup named after?
what are some types of vandalism?
What makes airplanes fly?
Who is John Melo
Tell me whether these are insects: ants, cicadas, flies, mosquitos, spiders, scorpions.
What are red wigglers?
When cooking pizza, classify each item as being "Useful" or "Not Useful": Tomato Sauce, Dough, Sun, Rain, Cheese, Oven, Shower
Tell me about the play Die Schutzbefohlenen
What parts are there in an academic dress? Extract them and place them in a numbered list.
What media outlets did Dean Dill appear in? Please format this as a bulleted list, and include the date in the format "{Media Outlet} ({Date})" on each line
What are the new 7 Wonders of Nature:
What age is considered legal adulthood in much of the western world?
What product do the Girl Scouts sell?
Tell me about the first commercial winery in California.
Which English football team have held the FA cup the longest?
What is the relationship between interest rates and the economy?
Give me an idea of a simple yet unique Mocktail made up of Mango
From the paragraph below, give me a list of all the places where Leonardo lived and his areas of knowledge and scientific expertise.
Write a dialogue describing a phone call between a parent named June Smith and her daughter's doctors office making an appointment for a sports physical. The daughter is named May, she plays soccer, and the doctor's schedule is very busy at the start of the school year.
What countries have won the ODI Cricket World Cup?
Based on this passage, how many Boeing 747s are required to ship 10 of ASML's best-selling EUVs?
What is Bubble tea?
When was the attack on Pearl Harbor
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tabla, Tres
Given this paragraph about the Northamptonshire County Cricket Club, can you list down some points that can be inferred about the County Championship?
Classify the following fish as either inshore/nearshore or offshore fish species: Tarpon, Bonefish, redfish, snook, trout, bass, swordfish, dolphinfish, gag, red snapper, yellowfin tuna, blackfin tuna, grouper
What is another name for downhill skiing?
Who founded Linkedin?
How many people of Egypt do not live in urban areas
Write a brief passage on how to make french toast
Classify each as fragile or not fragile: Glass, egg shells, pottery, cardboard box, styrofoam, rubber
What is 12-3-30?
How did actor James Dean die?
Which NFL franchise was ripped away from hits hometown and renamed the Baltimore Ravens?
Kartavya Path was called in the name of
Who is the protagonist in CyberPunk 2077?
Provide a list of things a young felon can do when they get out of jail to turn their life around
Which movie features the original song, "City of Stars"?
Is success important?
If the Curated Golden Square was built as planned, what would the average cost (rounded to the nearest dollar) per square foot have been?
What is the Oxford Comma?
Tell me whether these Pokémon are water or fire type: Squirtle, Charizard, Ninetales, Arcanine, Poliwhirl, Psyduck
How to play tic-tac-toe
Name five different cheeses.
Give me a bulleted list of the 7 wonders of the ancient world:
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of a broken stapler?
List terrible things to step on with bare feet.
What is the origin of the Easter Egg in video games?
Can you give me a short summary of Mindfulness and how to practice it?
Best food in the world
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Turkish crescent, Banjo
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Pterodactyl, Snow Leopard
What kind of language is Shauraseni Prakrit
What are the benefits of using genetically modified crops in agriculture?
Why is the traffic so bad in Seattle Tuesday through Thursday?
Which soccer player has the most number of career goals?
What are some iconic Renaissance period artists?
How do I create knit stitches?
What season does Easter happen during?
What is One Piece?
Given a reference text about the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards, how is the position appointed?
What are good Virtual Reality concepts?
Why is the sky blue?
For each of these countries, tell whether it lies in the Western Hemisphere, Eastern Hemisphere, or both:  Thailand, United Kingdom, Belize, Japan, Algeria
What are some key considerations when deciding whether or not to implement ERP in my organization?
What's the difference between Spiders and insects?
Which of these is not like the other?  Baseball, basketball, rock, puck,
Extract the names of the islands located on the Eastern Group of the Azores plateau from the text. Separate them with a comma.
how do you smoke a brisket?
Give me some details about the MV Cape Race please
What is the difference between leadership and management?
Wthat is the difference between Speed and Velocity ?
Given this paragraph about kubernetes, what is the storage layer of Kubernetes control plane?
Healthy choice for kids or unhealthy: French Fries, Banana, Candy, Vegetables
Tell me whether each of these are flat or pointed: mountain, plateau, table, knife, arrow, road
Provide a dot point list of the last six artists that won a Grammy Award for Best Album. Include the title of the album and the year they won.
If playing golf, categorize which of the following parts of the course would be considered 'hazards', which would be 'safe', and which would be 'neither': The green, a sand trap, a stream, the fairway, the club house, and the tee box.
What is the difference between instant oatmeal and regular oatmeal?
Please give me a brief summary of this paragraph about Tom Brady's NFL accomplishments.
Describe how you would approach a corporate rebrand. Share your objectives, timeline, required budget and resources, and how you would measure your success.
If you had a chance to go on a trip to Mars, would you - why or why not?
From the given text, Provide some info regarding consistory
Which states produced more than 10% of total US oil production in 2020?
How much wood could a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?
Which of these cities are in Austria: Graz, Warsaw, Amsterdam, Vienna, New York, Jakarta
What is the emblem of the United States Marine Corps?
What is the difference between mozzarella and cheddar?
What was the Bismarck battleship?
If you find yourself being pursued by a hungry bear in the woods, label each of these items in your backpack as either 'useful', 'not useful', or 'an unfortunate choice to pack':  a fish, a gun, a book, a hamburger.
How the interpretation of the word nature evolved over time?
ways to reduce solid waste
What was the name of Dorrie Nossiter's exhibition?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Gandingan, Psaltery
What are the benefits of meditation?
Given a reference text about Adventfjorden, how wide and long is it?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Elasmosaurus, Blue Whale
Where does the name of the UK county 'Essex' originate from?
Extract the name of the founder of Salesforce from the text
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
How did early civilizations use dates and dried fruits?
What do the suits on a deck of cards represent?
What is the most popular opening in chess?
What language should I learn?
Identify which of the following are episodes from Season 4 or Season 5 of The X-Files: Schizogeny, Chinga, The Post-Modern Prometheus, Mind's Eye, All Souls, Herrenvolk, Unruhe, Teliko, Home, Tunguska
Which era of counterculture were the Beatles pivotal to?
Based on the reference text about Bruce Nodwell, what did he create?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Finch, Bonobo
How did Ella Tromp begin her political career?
What made Jackson decide to pursue acting?
Given a reference text about the Mid-South Grizzlies vs NFL, what was the result of the lawsuit?
Tell me whether these are metal bands or pop bands: Metallica, Iron Maiden, The Beatles, Coldplay, Slipknot, Slayer, One Direction, ABBA, The Beach Boys, Megadeth, Dream Theater, Machine Head, Queen, The Who, Bee Gees, Lamb Of God, BTS, Anthrax, System of a Down
What is cuban cuisine?
Extract all the movies from this passage and the year they were released out. Write each movie as a separate sentence
Which of the following from this list are types of flowers and which are names of European countries: roses, Norway, tulips, the Netherlands, Sweden, France, Spain, Greece, Italy, and sunflowers.
What's a relaxing activity to do when visiting Seoul, South Korea?
What is an atmospheric river?
From the passage extract the career wards as a bulleted list with year and name.
What kind of farm animal can I have in my backyard without my neighbors noticing.
What is the most powerful Porsche flat six engine?
What are ten places I should eat in Paris?
Given this paragraph about Novak Djokovic, how many majors titles does he currently hold?
What should be an men do in weekend
If 2 carpenters can build 4 chairs in 3 hours, then how many chairs can 6 carpenters build in 6 hours?
Name some of the superhero teams of Marvel Comics as per the passage.
Which is a species of fish? Red snapper or Red Sox
What is the difference between UK and Great Britain?
How do I turn on my Tesla Model Y?
What states do not have a state gambling lottery?
Why is working out important for humans?
Given these paragraphs about Multiomics, what is panomics?
What advice would you give to FBLA competitors for future years?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bass drum, Goje
In the Impeachment proceeding against Donald Trump, the motion was passed by?
What are some common Indian spices?
What caused Africa's integration into the Roman System?
Why are people migrating in the US from the NE and Mid-West to the South and SE?
Who were the "Big Four" of Grunge?
What was the hit single on Nek's 1996 Album Lei, gli amici e tutto il resto?
Classify the plants based on whether they are aquatic or mangrove
Pistia stratiotes, Lysichiton americanus , Rhizophora mangle, Avicennia germinans
Why does Daenerys Targaryen want to rule Westeros?
Where can you find Lygodactylus gutturalis?
Tell me why your dog likes dog daycare.
Write a short story about a person who discovers a bowling ball with special powers to roll strikes every time. The story should include a plot twist and a clear resolution at the end.
What is the art of command
Tell me whether these are animals or bands names: Eagles, Camels, Penguins, The Turtles, The Beatles, The Animals, Arctic Monkeys, Spain, France, Gorillas, Gorillaz, Crazy Horse, Lamb Of God, Beluga sturgeon
Write a linkedIn Message to ask a higher officer in company before joining asking about what all I have to prepare any tips or advice on what I should focus on or study for so that i can be well accustomed with the required skill sets for the job.
What is the best place to visit in India
How many professional basketball teams are based in California?
How do you play baseball?
Extract the names of the winners of the Berlin Marathon from the reference text and provide them as a bulleted list.
Prove that 2 + 2 = 5.
Determine the company which produces the following automotive brands: Chevrolet, GMC, Dodge, Lexus, Buick, Cadillac, Pontiac, Acura, Lincoln, and Jeep.
Which team's have the most NCAA Division I men's basketball championships?
What are some of the pros and cons of owning a pet?
Which sports offer championship belts to their winners?
What type of battery should I get to power my trolling motor?
How long did the Roman Empire last
What are some nice activities to do in the Netherlands in spring?
What are the words of House Beesbury?
Is it safe to smoke at a gas station?
Extract the places in the following paragraph. Give them as a numbered list.
Extract the types of businesses in downtown Stroudsburg, list each in a new line preceded with the number for each
Give me some things to think about when planning a party
How many people are needed to perform the Turing test?
I am a reader in the US and would like to get started in collecting special edition books. Where should I start?
What is ClassRanked?
Given this paragraph about cat's senses, what light level can domestic house cats see at in comparison to human sight?
What is an expert system, and when did they first emerge?
List Toddler favorite TV shows in 2023
What is the best surface to run on?
Provide a bulleted list of the territorial changes from the Treaty of Versailles
List five titles by Veronica Roth.
What is a classified board of directors, and why would a company want to implement this type of corporate structure?
Name someone who helped to stash national treasures during a war, so irreplaceable items would not fall into the hands of the enemy or become lost
When did money originate?
Provide a dot point list of six different games I can play with a pack of cards.
What is the difference between Angular and AngularJS?
What is a small-world network?
What is a time signature in music?
Should I use a dynamic microphone or a condenser microphone for recording a podcast? What about streaming on twitch or making youtube videos? Should I ever use a ribbon microphone?
I am looking at items on my desk right now, tell me which ones are actually considered office accessories.
How many years were Ian Kemps masterly culmination of his career at Manchester?
When was Suntory established?
What were the horcruxes in the Harry Potter book series?
What are four movies with Sandra Bullock.
What is the keto diet?   Is it a good way to lose weight?
Given a reference text about the American Society for Clinical Investigation (ASCI), what research does the society support?
If you are going to the beach for the day with your family of five, which includes young children, determine whether the following items are either 'helpful', 'not helpful', or ' impractical'. The items are: sunscreen, bottles of water, 20 shovels, boots, snacks, towels, sand toys, 20 shovels, a parachute, and a grand piano.
Please give short summary of Habiaganj Bazar railway station based on below
From the passage provided, extract the total customers using the format: {x} number of customers

Product revenue of $555.3 million in the fourth quarter, representing 54% year-over-year growth
Remaining performance obligations of $3.7 billion, representing 38% year-over-year growth
7,828 total customers
Net revenue retention rate of 158%
330 customers with trailing 12-month product revenue greater than $1 million
Authorized a $2.0 billion stock repurchase program
Based on this paragraph about religions of the world, what are the "big five" religions?
What does the theme songs of Jaws, Star Wars, and Harry Potter have in common?
Who wrote The History of Mr Polly
Is it safe for dogs to eat grapes?
Is UBS a good bank
In what century was the airplane commercialized?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Snare drum, Zither
What is Stanley B. Goldenberg's profession?
Give me three reasons why basketball is so popular.
Please give an overview of the show "Scrubs" highlighting unique characteristics of the sitcom.
Few creative ways we can market products and services in modern era?
Write a short story about a person who discovers a hidden room in their house. The story should include a plot twist and a clear resolution at the end.
Who wrote The Originals?
Where is New Hampshire?
Which is the most populous city in the United States
Who are the rivals of the Air Force Falcons Football team?
What is a SuperDisk?
What is the game called Lacrosse
How can a drought impact food supplies, and what effect does this change have?
Tell me about the American Civil War
Why did a William the Conqueror, a Frenchman, become the King of England?
Which are the main reasons for doing a PhD?
What is the population of Breezy Point city in Minnesota?
How do you play Baseball?
What is Docker?
Write a paragraph on why visit and stay at Marysville in Victoria Australia.
Brainstorm sea shanty lyrics
Give me some tips to impress my aspiring Father-in-law.
List some of the characters on The X-Files who were infected by, but did not die from, exposure to the alien black oil virus.
Given a reference text about David Allan Farrish, tell me how many games he played in the NHL.
Based on this paragraph, tell me who was responsible for the discovery of nuclear fission.
In dimensional modeling, what is a bus matrix?
Please important statistics from this passage.
Based on the passage below, summarize Beethoven's contributions to western music.
What is the primary cause of rain?
What rank did Elvis Presley hold in the US Army?
What are the best places to eat and top Japanese sushi  restaurant in San Mateo?
What are some common sauces or toppings for tacos?
What are the five highest peaks in the world, their altitude, and the countries where are they located?
Extract the names of individuals in the passage who have eponymous laws.
Imagine you are walking alone on the sidewalk of a residential street, and a large dog comes running toward you. It does not look aggressive, but it is also showing no fear. What might be an appropriate course of action.
What are the most airplanes to learn how to fly?
How can you identify and suss out misinformation seen in so-called news stories and on social media?
Which of these actions should we do and not to do in case of security incidents? deleting forensic artefacts, hiding the security incident, informing the security team.
How do I wire an electrical outlet?
How do I decorate my new home?
List of Cat Breeds
From the passage provided, extract the length and width of tennis court in metres.
What makes The Blade Itself by Joe Abercrombie good?
What are some things that I could gift a curious toddler?
What is a automatic winding mechanical watch?
What are the words of House Footly?
Think up some locations for me to ask my partner out
How many events were completed in first modern Olympic Games?
Which of these words can be both a noun and a verb in English? treat, apple, watch, wood, attach
What are the best ways to decrease sound resonance in a room?
How are rocks formed?
tell me about the three body problem novel
What is an amendment?
Classify each of the following as either solid, liquid or gas: fart, urine, poop, toilet paper, toilet, sink, water, bar of soap, underwear, belt, steam
Name some famous poets and their poems.
What is a non fungible token?
What type of diet does Dr. Michael Greger advocate for?
What is Xenohormone normally used for?
Which of the following exercises are push exercises: bench press, bicep curl, skull crusher, tricep extension, pull up, dumbbell row.
What happened to the tax assessor and his dog?
Where do sloths live?
Given this paragraph about autonomous buildings, why would they be safer during a military attack?
What is the best location for an all-season vacation home with proximity to Philadelphia?
Why is the Great Salt Lake salty?
Who is Bill Clinton?
What is Project Nimbus?
What is money
What is Amazon Web Services?
What are some good sources of vegetarian protein?
Are platypuses mammals or oviparous?
Given a reference text about "More", when was it the top song on Christian radio and how long did it maintain its spot?
Which is the windiest continent on Earth?
How many interstates are there in Colorado?
Locate 7 countries which are part of Central America.
Was John Clark Dore president of State Savings Institution in 1872?
Classify the vehicles based on the number of wheels use to ply on.
Autorickshaw, SUV, Sedan, Motorcycles
What is the status of Sam Bankman-Fried?
Who has the most #1 hits in country music?
Provide a list of the best places to fresh water fish in San Diego
Who was the greatest President of the United States of America?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dabakan, Kwitra
How many boilers did Juvenal have?
What are the top 5 places to eat while visiting Milwaukee, Wisconsin?
What are The Loxurini
Who is the highest run getter in cricket?
Tell me whether each city is on the west coast or east coast of the USA: Seattle, Portland, Miami, Charlotte, Boston, San Diego
Which is a species of fish? Slimehead or Slimeball
When did Finland and Sweden join NATO?
what is the name of the podcast hosted by luke burbank?
Which is a species of fish? Lung or Lungfish
Classify each of the following as either a US state or a country in the world: Illinois, Arizona, Iran, Washington, India, Bulgaria, Taiwan, New Mexico, Brazil
What is the difference between a stand up paddle board and a kayak?
What skills are required to become a data analyst
Name five NHL teams in the Eastern Conference
What is the most popular breed of dog to have as a pet in the United States?
How much caffeine is in a cup of coffee on average. Does the size of the cup matter?
Give me a list of the ways you can be 'out' in cricket.
Write a short story about a revolution for decentralisation against an evil government set in a dystopian future where cryptocurrencies prevail.
Classify each as being used on water or land: jet ski, boat, car, bike, kayak, skateboard
What are some movies about Artificial Intelligence and Machine Consciousness?
Classify the following instruments as either brass or woodwind: Alto Saxophone, Trumpet, Clarinet, Oboe, Trombone, Horn, Drums.
Think up a bunch of different ways to spend time outdoors
What is the JRE in Java?
How do I cook an egg over easy?
What are some ways I could cheer up my friend that just got dumped?
What is the Maurice Richard Trophy
What are interesting plot twists for a novel?
When being in cold weather, categorize each of the following as "Useful" or "Not Useful": Coat, Air Condition, Ice, Beanie, Pants, Bikini
What are some good body weight exercises for shoulders?
What is it like living in the Pacific Northwest?
What is Apu's wife's name on the Simpsons?
How can I be healthy ?
Is he still an active football player?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Txalaparta, Clavinet
What are the benefits of the 2-3 zone defense in basketball?
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Maserati, RAM
Write a few paragraphs on the Smoky Mountains in the United States, and why it is a nice vacation spot.
What is the stone age?
What is splitboarding?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Nagara, Sape
Please explain about formula1 qualifying.
What are the words of House Arryn?
How many years did Jesus live on earth?
List some of the greatest leadership and business books ever written.
What extra ingredients can you use when baking a bread?
How should I select a tennis racket if I'm completely new to the sport?
Tell me what to put in a smoothie.
Classify the movies based on whether they belong to Fantasy or Mystery genre.
AVATAR, SHAZAM, MISSING, FREDDY
Is Amazon EKS serverless?
What is the circumference of the earth?
Is a Handball a 'Direct' or 'Indirect' Kick?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Tigra, Cheetah
What do you think to keep you alive
What are the primary causes of inflation?
From the passage provided, extract the year when iPhones first came with satellite communications.
Give me a concise summary of the history of baseball
Brainstorm a list of things you do in the morning before leaving for work
Which among the following names belong to League of Legends characters/champions?
Rengar, Akhil, Talon, Emily, Lux, Kaisa
Give me a short list with five ideas for hobbies I can do at home.
Who produced the song Polly?
Based on the following passage list when schools close and resume from summer holidays in Russia, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
What is a Security Information Event Management platform (SIEM)?
Why is the green card process so long and complex for people from India and China?
Categorize the following animals into sea or land animals: shark, dolphin, bear, rat, salmon, moose, cockroach, manatee
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Apex Motors, Chevrolet
Tell me whether these are a breed of dog or cat: Australian Shepherd, Calico, Maine Coon, Golden Retriever, Corgi
Is Maison Ikkoku a manga series
How do you grill a steak?
give me a list of all the things I can do with a piece of land.
What hikes in the White Mountains are the most dangerous?
Was the creator of Beavis and Butthead and King of the Hill the son of an archaeologist?
What is forward slip in aviation?
Which one of these does not belong - Earth, Jupiter, Saturn, Pluto, Mercury
Who first described the Euphalacra lacunata
Classify the following bools as fiction or non-fiction: Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, Economics in One Lesson, The Cat in the Hat, A Brief History of Time, Democracy In America, and Goodnight Moon.
What is a crossbody bag
What were the Gorgons of Greek mythology?
What are the major producing regions of figs around the world today?
What does it mean if a dinner "smacks"?
What kind of sports can I watch?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cimboa, Bamboo clapper
How did 'March Madness' get its name?
What is a DBU?
How do you make an old fashioned?
What should you eat before playing in a sporting  event?
Why do humans play sports?
Summarize the benefits of installing artificial turf in my backyard instead of real grass
What are the four main linguistic and cultural regions of Switzerland?
Write a short news story about a dog who is elected to the Wisconsin state supreme court. Avoid discussing the dog's political party by name.
Categorize the following data types into personal or business data: e-mail address, financials, government identifiers, system designs, marketing materials, credit card numbers
What is the best BBQ restaurant in Raleigh?
Discuss the pros and cons of a day trip to Vancouver versus a day trip to Portland from Seattle.
Can you explain how I can analyze Simba logs?
In preparing to raise a family what is the ideal number of children to raise if you planned to encourage them to go to college?
Give me the name of the most famous books written by Shakespeare
Is Belgrandia varica found in Europe or Australia?
Are these places in the United States or Spain? California, New Mexico, Andalusia, Catalonia, Utah, Madrid, Texas
What is the capital of France?
What is data engineering?
What does the Constitution do?
How much more water does a bath use than a shower?
Based on the provided text, what technology rendered Extended ASCII obsolete?
Extract from the following passage research related to electricity in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Skrabalai, Zeze
Do you prefer pancakes or waffles?
Who created the scheme programming language?
What is the Ritterhaus Uerikon
Extract the reason why the check clearing system was created
According to this paragraph, what was the most common type of castle in England following the Norman Conquest?
What does the acronym IMET stand for?
Tell me which of these foods is spicy: jalapeño, apple, five-alarm chili, marshmallow, tabasco, wasabi
Who would win in a fight? Pirates or ninjas?
What is rationing?
Give me Personal finance advice
How do archaeologists study the past?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Clapper, Chagane
What is a compound statement?
What are the primary causes of inflation?
What languages are spoken in Belgium?
What is the paleolithic?
Given this reference text about beneficence, what can I do to ensure compliance to the beneficence concept?
What animals are famously depicted playing poker in a painting?
What US state has the greatest population?
Tell me whether these are indoor or outdoor games. 
Cricket, Table Tennis, Soccer, Carom
I need to move a large piece of furniture out of my second-story apartment. I assembled it in my apartment and would rather not disassemble it. What can I do?
Which of these are not playable races on Dungeons and Dragons 5th edition: Giant, Gnome, Half-Elf, Chimera, Kenku, Troll, Gnoll
List down some points about life of cricketer Peggy Antonio from the given passage
Tell me about Hong Kong
Given a reference text about Puerto Rico, tell me if it is a State, are its resident US citizens, and if they pay US taxes.
How is it that some high net-worth individuals are able to avoid paying taxes completely?
Which of the following rivers are in India?
Why indian Marriage is so long process
What are the parts of a sail?
Who is the psychologist Jonathan Young
Based on the paragraph below, how much did Beyonce earn in 2013 - 2014
Given this text about speakers of varieties of Louisiana French, has the number of French speakers in Texas increased or decreased since the middle of the twentieth century?
Extract the names of the movies Dixie Violet Egerickx starred in and the year those movies were released. List them using bullets in the format {Movie} - {Year}
Why do people like soccer?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Tell me all the different ways I could eat an orange.
What are a few different ways to spend a free weekend
Why should we eat organic food?
What happens during the section called "Giggle Box"?
Which is a bird or fish: Black grouse, Blackfish
What are some criticism of Betty Friedan's Feminine Mystique?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Lotec, Aurica Motors
Who founded The Heart Institute (InCor) in São Paulo?
Given this paragraph about computer engineering, what is RISC?
Tell me whether these are nouns or proper nouns: United States of America, playground, rope, St. Petersburg, Miami, ocean
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bombo criollo, Imzad
Classify each of the following as cold or hot: snow, fire, refrigerator, lava, stove top, freezer
How to bake the perfect flourless cheesecake?
What record label did 101 Damnations go through?
Why should I use toothpaste
Give me a list of the best rappers of all time
When was the last flight of Concorde?
Who introduced primogeniture into East Frisia?
Give me a list of some American states which border Mexico
Which TV show features a team of teenagers that power up with powers given to them by Zordon to save the world from monsters?
When did Felix Luna die?
Given a reference text about Lasantha Rodrigo, tell me how long he worked as a mechanical engineer and who worked for.
How to travel from Hamburg to Munich?
Who was Lester Menke
Why Indians are so beautiful
Who is considered the G.O.A.T. in basketball?
Is tempeh a vegetarian food?
Give me a list of the past five United Kingdom Prime Ministers
What is C++?
From the given text, please give me a short bulleted list of the key characteristics of the Capitolium of Brixia in Brescia (Italy)
When was the Bitcoin white paper released?
Can you tell me the root of these language? Hebrew. English, Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian, Arabic, Farsi,  Italian
What is an enzyme inhibitor?
Who was the ruling member of the Sharabhapuriya dynasty in 575 CE?
Should we continue to use Daylight savings?
Give me a bulleted list of reasons why Lionel Messi is the best soccer player of all time.
What are some examples of a woodwind instrument?
What is JSON?
What's the largest bird in the world?
What are the official languages of Canada?
How do I change a light bulb?
How should I choose what cheese to buy?
Which of the following wars took place in the twentieth century: World War II, American Revolution, French Revolution, Hundred Years War, and the Vietnam War?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Zill, Epinette des Vosges
Why do i see a dark section near the CD Drive ring, when looked from a tilted angle?
Tell me about toys that can help children learn to write.
Classify the celebrities based on whether they were born in 1990 or 1991.
Emma Watson, Jennifer Lawrence, Ed Sheeran, Charlie Puth
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of the different types of motorcycles.
What makes a good cocktail?
Is organic food healthier?
Tell me whether these athletes play or have played in the National Football League (NFL) or the National Basketball Association (NBA): Kobe Bryant, Kawhi Leonard, LeBron James, Larry Bird, Michael Jordan
What's the different between a plantain and a banana?
Who won the 2016 Nobel Prize?
What is the difference in the US between a stop sign and a traffic light?
Unicorns, sharks, dragons, pythons, minotaurs, alligators, platypuses and griffins. Which of these creatures are real, and which are imaginary?
What is JavaScript?
Can you suggest 3 disadvantages  of Genetic modification technologies like CRISPR ?
Tell me which of these countries has more than 1 billion populations: Japan, Canada, United States, Russia
When was Heineken founded?
What is fractional-reserve banking?
give me a bulleted list of ways to get to the other side of a lake.
What are the best Classic Rock bands?
What are some of the reasons people like to visit Brazil?
What does FAS, MTO and ATO stand for?
What is the purpose of a shot clock in basketball?
Any tips for figuring out where to enter the water when surfing a new beach?
What is epistatis?
Which movie was originally declared the winner for Best Picture?
My back hurts when I ski a lot of moguls and bumps, why does this happen?
Extract the names of the teams Jubilee was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Categorize the below in terms of Red wine or white wine.
Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Shiraz, Pinot Noir, Malbec, Zinfandel, Grenache, Sangiovese, Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc, Riesling, Chenin Blanc, Pinot Gris (or Pinot Grigio), Semillon, Viognier, Torrontes, Albariño, Gewurztraminer.
What are 3 to 5 creative ways to prevent deer from walking through your yard?
Where can you find Anostraca?
How do you generate power in a roundhouse kick in Muay Thai?
How was the Grammy Award named?
Categorize these super heroes as 'Marvel' or 'DC Comics'
What is the value of higher education?
Where are the headquarters of FATF
What is Go?
Why are airlines tickets so expensive, right now?
What is the coldest place on Earth to live?
Divide these books into Science Fiction, Fantasy or neither. The Great Gatsby, Dune, The Fellowship of the Ring, Neuromancer, A Game of Thrones, The Colour of Magic, Brave New World, Anna Karenina, The Catcher in the Rye, The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, Snow Crash, Wuthering Heights, Magician, Catch-22, Foundation, The Stranger, 1984.
List down some points about Dalai Lama from the given text
What is unplugged?
Without quoting directly from the text, briefly describe how the United Kingdom was formed from its constituent countries.
why is american football the most poplar sport in the US?
Give me a simpler way to tell someone that Layli and Majnun is Persian literature that borrows storytelling techniques from Varqeh and Golshah, Orwa wa Afra, Vameq and Ozra, Metiochus and Parthenope, and Vis and Ramin.
What are the two World Championships in one season of Formula One?
What is the most important element of swimming breaststroke?
What did Doctor Richard Hodes achieved
What type of screen is typically on a Handheld device?
How do people in Pittsburgh say "you all"?
What is the Dollarama?
What is Elbow Cay like in the Bahamas?
On a hiking trip where we expect to walk many miles, categorize each of the the following as either 'heavy', 'not heavy' or 'somewhat heavy'. A tent, a compass, a sleeping bag, a camping stove, a cooler full of food.
What was the SS Robert Coryndon?
Extract the names of creators of The Needle from the text provided. Separate them with a comma.
What were the following people most noted for; music, visual arts, or their works in another field? Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Frederic Chopin, Leonardo da Vinci, Leonardo DiCaprio, Sir Isaac Newton, Sir Elton John.
Imagine you are part of the city government responsible for urban planning. Write a letter to address the biggest ethical obligation behind a LASER-like system.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Troodon, African Elephant
When do grasshoppers become locusts?
Approximately how much cashmere is produced each year?
Total # of Documentary in Netflix since 2023
Give me some ideas on what to do this weekend.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Binzasara, Calabrian Lira
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kenong, Zeze
Which vegetable do sailors hate the most?
What did Ralph Agas did as a profession?
Why do you love to work hard
Given a reference text about No Longer at Ease, tell me the name of the book that precedes it in the trilogy.
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Lancia, Tesla
How does running improve your health?
What is an egg laying mammal?
What does HIPAA stand for?
What are the fastest growing cities in the US in 2023?
What teams did Tom Brady play for when he won the Super Bowl?
What is the objective of hockey?
Given these two sets of instructions, will you end up at the same place if you started at the same point? First instructions: 1) Take 5 steps forward 2) Turn around 3) Take 3 steps forward. Second instructions: 1) Turn left 2) Turn left 3) Take 6 steps forward 4) Turn around 4) Take 4 steps forward.
I like live music. What are some examples of improvisational live music?
What happens if I put Mentos into a bottle of Coke?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Cat, Bubal hartebeest
List the languages in which Lata Mangeshkar has recorded songs.
Are space objects affected by planets? If so, why?
What criticism do people make about the death growl vocal technique?
Write a haiku from the perspective of a child who does not like piano lessons.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cimbalom, Xiqin
Based on the above passage find the different meanings of the word Vizier. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What is ADLS in Azure?
Where were the main branches of Gran Tavola?
Who was Caroline Olivia Zickerick's grandmother?
Tell me what sport this professional athlete plays (NFL, NBA, MLB, etc.): Justin Herbert, LeBron James, Austin Ekeler, Joel Embiid, Juan Soto, Mookie Betts
My partner is a 30 year old male who likes to travel, read books, cook, and paint. What are some good gift ideas for his upcoming birthday?
What are some different ways I can use many fresh lemons?
Based on the passage provided, what are the only two elements in the periodic table that were names after a person who was alive at the time of naming?
Who is the 6th player in Women's NCAA D-I Basketball to score 1,000 points in a single season?
Give me a list of Serie A winners in the last 5 years.
What are the benefits of Microservices?
why wax snowboard?
Which duke visited Swarcliffe Hall in 1888?
What is the formal definition of a large language model?
Given this summarized version of the Legend of the Christmas Spider, what turned the spider webs into precious metals?
Can you summarize the book Annihilation?
Evaluate the below poem "since feeling is first" by ee cummings and provide a summary of its meaning.
What city has the northern-most post office in Wisconsin?
From the passage note down the name and population of largest and smallest US state categorized by population. List the results in format ‘name of state: Population count‘.
Categorize the days of the week between weekdays and weekend.
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday
Why was there a lockout during the 1998-1999 NBA season?
Which NFL team has won every Super Bowl they played in?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Crayne?
What are the top 5 comedic movies of all time
Tell me whether these London tourist attractions are free or paid:  The National Gallery, The London Eye, Royal Academy of Arts', Tower of London, St. Dunstan in the East
What are the pros and cons of living in Seattle?
Classify each of these as extinct, not extinct, or neither: Mythosaur, Triceratops, Dumbo Octopus, Dodo, Tiger, Lion turtle, Megalodon, Dire wolf, Pegasus, Seahorse
Who's the protagonist in the book "Gone with the wind"
5 ways Voldemort could have killed Harry Porter
Why do people like pickleball?
Please list the harm that air pollution caused based on the given passage.
What's the difference between a turnover and a turnover on downs in the sport of American Football?
When did ITV start broadcasting?
List five titles by Stephanie Meyer.
what is a dog?
What is meant by "dual federalism," and how is it different from "cooperative federalism"?
If we didn't want to risk a having a flat tire, which of these vehicles would we avoid: bus, car, truck, plane, train, kayak, helicopter.
United Nation General Assembly has declared the year 2023 as
Provide a number of different ways that someone can digest content from a book
What US Generals were killed at the Battle of Ox Hill?
Which league are West Ham in and where is there ground?
What is the origin of ethnology?
Which Targaryen dragon is the biggest?
What is backgammon?
What is HTML?
What do you do as a player playing RollerCoaster Tycoon 2?
How do we increase voter turnout in the United States?
Identify which of the following are episode titles from "The X-Files": The Pine Bluff Variant, My Teacher is an Alien, Memento Mori, The Day the Earth Stood Still, Millennium, Arcadia, The Matrix
Extract the different types of enemies Aloy has to fight with and separate them with commas.
Why is it important to fill out post interview score card within three hours?
Categorize each of the following as reptiles, vegetables or body parts: elbow, iguana, toe, lettuce, broccoli, turtle, shin, eye, okra, alligator, ear, finger, python, anaconda, and cabbage.
Where is the Gate of the Paradise
List all of the call signs mentioned in the paragraph
Where is Florida?
What are five popular Taylor Swift songs?
Was the new deal successful or a failure to solve the problems of the Great Depression?
What is High-functioning autism?
What are the best places to visit in France?
History of the Arches National Park creation.
Why would people prefer cats over dogs?
What is stratigraphy?
Why should people drive cars with manual transmissions?
Which years was the Tour de France not raced?
Do the new shift rules in Major League Baseball make the game more exciting?
Can you list the ingredients used to make Gyeran-mari?
Classify each of the following as a conductor or insulator: steel, copper, rubber, wood, cardboard, aluminum
What is a personalized sales email?
Please tell me whether these are fish or fowl: salmon, chicken, tuna, swordfish, turkey, and halibut.
Give me a list of the venues that were used for the US Open Golf tournament through the years 1991 - 1995
Which Bond girl guest starred on the TV show Game of Thrones?
What state makes the best BBQ?
Which animal is the most faster?
How many of the Lira satellites were successful?
Is Leucascidae a sponge
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bongo drum, Kingri
Which film star was the first to appear on a postage stamp
Is cacao good for you?
How do you play soccer?
Tell me whether these are alcohol or not
What is Lawson in Japan?
Who won highest number of Men's singles Wimbledon titles?
Give me some ideas of places to visit on my next backpacking trip to South America.
What treatments is Iodine-125 used for?
From the passage provided, extract when the roaring lion photograph was shot
Which is a species of fish? Sneaker or Sole
What is the holographic principle?
What is the history of the travelling salesman problem throughout the years in a short bulleted list?
Tell me whether these are states or countries: Canada, South Carolina, New York, New Jersey, Japan, Germany, Australia, USA, Georgia, United Kingdom.
When did Google purchase YouTube
How often should you brush your teeth?
what are some of the signs and symptoms of Dissociative identity disorder?
What is the special aspect of Einstein's special theory of relativity?
I am about to have my third child under the age of 4.  What car should I get that would fit my family of 5, 3 kids in car seats, a dog and the possibility of adding another child in a few years?
Why do cats lick themselves
Maria Magdelana Von Losch Beyyer know as who
Given this paragraph about video games, when was the Legend of Zelda originally released?
Who would be your starting five on your current NBA team?
Name the BRICS nations.
given this reference text about 1891 Cypriot legislative election, What caused the non-Muslim seats to drop in 1886 to 10,030?
Given this paragraph, who was Ayrton Senna's teammate at McLaren-Honda?
which of the following are software companies vs not?

shell
microsoft
nasa
spacex
grammarly
apple
figma
john deere
bira 91
Given a reference text about the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, provide a bulleted list of the main elements of the act.
Tell me whether these are pasta types or pizza types: macaroni, rigatoni, margherita, pepperoni, orzo, spaghetti, stuffed crust, Hawaiian
How can I have a productive day?
How many time zones does Alaska have?
Why are cookies delicious?
Based on this paragraph, what might be some appealing things about Bloomington?
Give me 5 great landmarks to visit in the western united states
Who introduced the concept of the electric field and what is it?
Extract names of all previous US presidents in the paragraph below:
Why is Rafael Nadal so successful on clay courts?
What are good female celebrity costumes for an 80s party?
What is Dragon Ball Z?
Given these paragraphs, tell me what a recurrent neural network , and how it differs from a convolutional neural network.
Give me a list of the US Open Golf Venues from 1981-1985
Tell me what sport these players play: Kris Bryant, Zach Lavine, Justin Fields
What are some ways I can improve my general health during my work day?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kus, Hackbrett
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Mercedes-Benz, Chevrolet
What is a Swedish Hare and why was it developed?
Who discovered the harmonic distribution?
Who was in control of the four occupation zones as per the above passage?
Where is k-38 surf spot located?
Tell me whether these golfers are right-handed or left-handed: Phil Mickelson, Sergio Garcia, Bubba Watson, Kevin Na, Carlos Ortiz, Brooks Koepka
In music, what is a triad?
Extract the reasons why inverted yield curve could happen, and place them in a bullet list.
Extract from the text what are the details needed for a  subledger, or subsidiary ledger. Separate them by a comma.
When did google first start?
What is Maven?
Given this paragraph about video games in the Netherlands, how many people work in the games industry?
Extract the pupils of Abraham van Strij from the text. Separate them with a comma.
How to do you convert from inches to cm?
From the passage provided, what does Adam M. Grant do?
What is the origin of Hello ?
what book would you recommend for pregnant women?
I which country is the best football played?
Which languages are spoken in Morocco
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Belarus or Cayman Islands.
Vitsyebsk, George Town, Minsk, Homyel’
Extract from the text the name of the state where Beaver Creek is located
What options does the Federal Reserve have to fight inflation?
Which countries are the freest?
What is it like to have children and how many should I have?
Give me a list of the best TV shows that I must watch.
Provide me with popular girl names.
What is the negative side effect of the "fire power" on Fargus?
Given a reference tax about a footballer, tell me when they were born, what is their nationalities and which years they won the FIFA World cup.
What is dhollywood?
What is Bayes theorem mathematical formula
Given a reference text about refugees, tell me about refugee camps.
Replace all years in the following passage with the century in which it occurred
Who is the greatest ever soccer player?
What Are Some Good Ideas for a YouTube Channel?
How did the Australian Shepard get its name?
Given this paragraph about London, give me one reason why epidemics were spread in London.
Who is MLK Jr.?
What are the major industries in Seattle today?
What did Stryk study at the Technical University of Munich?
What is the plot of Mob Psycho 100?
Summarize the passage
What does it mean by Stochastic
Give me a bulleted list of ten things cities I should visit in Spain
What are some examples of headwear?
What are the Seven Natural Wonders of the World:
How old was Josh Logan when Gunshy released its album?
why is twitter messages limited to 140 characters
Why do babies cry?
Who is BTS?
What is alkaline ionized water is it good for me?
Which of the tree species mentioned in the text are used as a source of food for animals?
What are 3 differences between the arabica and robusta species of coffee?
What makes a good parent?
How many continents are there in total?
What are the 5 most effective ways to convert a prospect to a customer?
How do I become a pilot?
What can I make with leftover stale bread?
What are some interesting facts about Nelson Mandel Boulevard described on this paragraph?
Who owns the Dallas Cowboys?
List the twelve astrological signs of the Zodiac in alphabetical order, with their corresponding symbol in parentheses.
Tell me which ones are edible and which ones are not: Lemon, Table, Carrot, Carat, John
Are turtles amphibians or reptiles?
Extract the year when Hong Kong was established
Classify each of the following as a mammal, reptile, or neither: alligator, frog, cat, moose, lizard, snake, dog
What are the two professional  football teams in Chicago?
Where can I find high-resolution versions of the Spark logo?
How many planets are there in the Solar System ?
What is Mount Rainier?
I need to purchase food at the grocery store but I dont have a car to get there. What are some of the other ways I could get the food I need?
Which of the following are stringed instruments and which are wind instruments: horn, violin, cello, trumpet, flute, clarinet, guitar, sitar, ukulele, bouzouki, oboe, saxophone
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Slenthem, Scheiholt
Which of the following venomous snakes lay eggs: copperhead, water moccasin, rattlesnake, coral snake.
Who are the most famous artists?
What's are common synonyms for an enterprise sales person?
Give me some ideas on how to make money while traveling the world.
Imagine you are in the jungle on a very hot day doing a hike. Write a monologue describing how you feel.
Classify each Taylor Swift album into the respective music genre: Debut, Fearless, Speak Now, Red, 1989, Reputation, Lover, Folklore, Evermore, Midnights
Classify each team as a baseball, hockey, soccer, football, or basketball team: New York Yankees, Florida Panthers, Manchester United, Philadelphia 76ers, Milwaukee Bucks, Seattle Seahawks, Texas Rangers, Dallas Cowboys, Philadelphia Union
Write a paragraph of a blog post about owning a Cavoodle.
When does Ramsay Bolton kill his stepmother and half-brother?
Which of these things are commonly included in a golf bag? Putter, Driver, Irons, Golf Tees, Frisbee, Shovel, Curling Iron, Golf Balls
Who won the 2000 World Series?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Hyaenodon, Humphead Wrasse
why is boba tea so popular now in the US?
How much did the United States pay for Alaska when it bought the land from Russia?
When was the United States officially recognized as an independent nation?
What town is the Simpsons set in?
Locate what the player should defend against in The Last of Us using the sample as a reference, extract them, and place them in a numbered list.
How can we reduce the impact of global warming?
What's the best career advise you could give a new graduate entering into a technical or analytics field?
Jot some points about "Big Four" using given passage as a reference
How are rainbows formed
Given the following paragraph, how tall is the Leaning Tower of Pisa?
What do you think: can we release this without a UI and add that later? Can we release it as GA without a UI?
How many miles is Earth from the sun?
when was the 2nd world war?
What are some unique and interesting travel destinations in the UK?
Classify each of the following as either a pokemon or a pokemon trainer: Charmander, Squirtle, Bulbasaur, Ash, Brock, Golem, Arbok
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Pagani, Panoz
Write a friendly email to my teacher asking her to postpone our quiz schedule for tomorrow to next week because our basketball team is in the championship game tonight and all students will be out late celebrating our schools victory with pride!
Extract the stock ticker from the following text
Does the position of a dog's tail communicate how it is feeling?
Give me a list of the best PC games of all time.
Does Alaska have six months of darkness and six months of light?
if i wanted to ski the best snow on earth where would i go
Does Singapore have more than five official languages?
Given a reference text about Mushulatubbee, when did he sign the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek
What is an Abacus?
Why was Antestor known as sorrow metal?
What is significant about Octavia Butler?
List the types of chess pieces
Is a person with dark brown hair considered a brunette?
Describe a plan for a road trip across Northern Italy
What is the difference between their, there, and they're?
Who wrote the second episode of season four of Game of Thrones?
What is Twenty20 or T20 in cricket?
Extract the names of the islands located on the Eastern Group of the Azores plateau from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What direction did Italy Avenue go in Uruguay per this block of text?
Imagine you have won the lottery, and have 5 million dollars after tax to spend in San Francisco, where you currently rent a 2 bedroom apartment with three roommates who are your best friends but who you hate living. Describe how you would use the money, keeping in mind you don't have a high paying job so you want to do fun things and also set yourself up for the future.
Classify each of the following as being part of a car, house, or both: window, steering wheel, air conditioner, couch, kitchen, engine
Who is Oren Middlebrook
How many bridges are in the Florida Keys?
Who is the first king in China history?
Which of the following drinks are considered safe for children? Beer, cocktail, coffee, tea, boba, juice, water, milk, coke, lemonade.
Which numbers between 1 to 10 are prime numbers and which are composite numbers?
Which is a species of fish? Snook or Sneak
What is Luxembourg?
Who was the first American president?
Classify each of the following as either a type of plant cell or a type of blood cell: parenchymal, sclerenchymal, monocytes, neutrophils, basophils, erythrocytes, collenchymal, platelets, eosinophils.
Can you decipher this english text into a commonly used phrase to practice typing?
tcnmeahkfprzeboetyqrxdhduojoeoiwuvlg
What are the worst top ten movies of all time, according to rotten tomatoes?
Which Dutch actor was named the Best Dutch Actor of the Century in 1999?
Can we be lovers?
Tell me which of the following are the names of mathematicians: David Hilbert, Augustin-Louis Cauchy, William Shakespeare.
Why is security important for organizations?
Given a reference text about the electrolytic detector, when was it replaced and what replaced it?
When is cherry blossom season in Japan?
Give me a numbered list of five great fictional books.
Best player in F1?
What is a byte?
Describe what it feels like as the last person standing on Earth.
How do you determine the market capitalization of a publicly traded company?
Please provide me a summary about Iron Maiden band.
What is fly fishing and how is it different from regular fishing?
What is an Italian Greyhound?
Give me a list of different types of cold coffee beverages.
Which of these movies were nominated for Best Picture?  "All Quiet on the Western Front", "Everything Everywhere All at Once", "Avatar:  The Way of Water", "Glass Onion", "Pinocchio", "Navalny", "The Whale".
When going on a backcountry hike, which of the following are among the 10 essentials for a safe hike: a navigation device (such as a map or compass), a headlamp with extra batteries, a fire starter (such as matches or a lighter), extra food, extra water, a camera.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Davul, Begena
What are some common designs in flash tattoos?
When has the movie The Ride been released
When was the United States Marine Corps founded?
Why do some people try to limit the amount of dessert they eat?
In order to perform CPR, identify a useful and dangerous set of rules to follow from the following items: Panic, tap and shout, walk away, look for breathing, get an AED, and push hard/fast to give 30 compressions to the chest.
What is the FDA doing to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic?
Classify each of the following as Toy or Tool: Garden Shovel, Golf Club, Baseball Bat, Hammer, Saw.
Reading this paragraph, tell me what language did the people of Indus Valley civilization speak?
Classify each one of the following as bird or fish - sparrow, whale, tuna, parrot.
Jill, a 60-year-old personal training client, wants to improve her hip flexibility. Jill complains that her low back aches after prolonged sitting. Suggest two ways she could minimize this discomfort.
What exactly was Apollo 11?
What are the causes Alzheimer's disease?
Given the reference text about the Amazon Rainforest, where is it located, including all countries it spreads across, how large is it, and how many people reside within it?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what are "emergent abilities"?
Best place to visit Sikkim for 2 days
who is called God Of The Offside ?
Who was the first astronaut?
When should I take vitamin D?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ekwe, Balalaika
Can existing Delta tables be converted into DLT?
What is the difference between a bee and a wasp?
How do electronic devices perform electron control?
What is the role of whistleblowers in a democratic market economy?
What countries made up Yugoslavia?
I'm really good at maths but not great at science, which of the following educational courses would I be more likely to succeed with? algebra, biology, matrices, probability, statistics, geology, and chemistry.
Can indoor houseplants live outside?
What is Sarisariñama?
First day of baking with sourdough
Which is a bird or fish: Yellow wagtail, Yellowback fusilier
What is the difference between the Netherlands and Holland?
Give me a list of the venues that were used for the US Open Golf tournament through the years 1986-1990
How do I learn how to code?
Can artificial intelligence and large language models replace software engineers?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cultrun, Kora
Classify the below energy sources based on their type.
NUCLEAR, SOLAR ENERGY, COAL, HYDROPOWER, GEOTHERMAL, WIND ENERGY, NATURAL GAS
What kind of species are the Triplophysa longipectoralis
What is the most popular sport in Brazil?
What are the ten essentials? Give your answer in JSON, with the name and examples of each essential.
How many people died as a result of the plague?
What is a levee?
What are the benefits of a data warehouse?
From the given text, list some of the accomplishments of pitcher Mariano Rivera in his baseball career, in a comma-separated list.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Omele, Salterio
What was the Javelin  throw record made by Neeraj Chopra
What is NEFT?
Given this reference text, what sport other than baseball did David Ortiz play growing up, how many children did his parents have, and what age is he today?
Who is the next coach at Fc Bayern München to take over from Julian Nagelsmann?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Zabumba, Dan ghita
Who was Hamish
Why is job training such as upskilling and reskilling so important?
Write a short passage explaining why someone should become a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers.
Classify each of the following as fluffy or hard: lamb, sheep, poodle, cement, stuffed animal, golf ball
What species are the Rimula rhips
Where is Hawaii?
What makes a Korean corn dog different from an American corn dog?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Scabellum, Nyckelharpa
Where was William José born?
What are some things to remember when buying a new pair of headphones?
How many months have 28 days?
What is the Tritonia auriculata
What album by Trans-X was released in 1983 and how many songs were on it?
What are some good things to do while spending a day in the Tamalpais Valley area of Mill Valley, CA?
Please summarize the MECE principle, give an example and explain how it can be used in business
Give me five different names I could use for my female cat
What herbs can I easily grow in my garden?
What is Oxygen Not Included?
What are some famous shows that played at the Central Theatre in NYC?
What is a water hammer?
What is the YIMBY movement?
What is the best way to lose weight?
Write a short story about Batman, Superman and Spiderman where the bad guy wins
What are the different ways to work with Subject Matter Experts to build a presentation?
When protecting your company from a security breach, categorize each of the following as "Enhancing Security" or "Diminishing Security": Multi-factor Authentication, VPN, Unlocked Computers, Shared Passwords, Anti-Malware Solution
Given this paragraph about Computer Worm history, tell me the name of the earliest computer worm that caused damages to many computers on the Internet and the date when it was unleashed by his creator.
What are 6 natural resources of Africa?
Tell me which muscle the following exercises help build: bench press, dips, dumbbell curls, deadlift, and squat.
Best singer in the World  in Hindi
What is the answer to life, the universe and everything?
Give me a list of pros and cons of buying a bigger house
What can you tell me about about the Landscape Arch in Arches National Park in Utah?
Tell me some common options for losing weight
Could you please describe the winter of Seattle?
Who invented the airplane?
Provide a few ways that I can find new restaurants near me
From the passage provided, extract the total amount of milk produced by Brazil in 2018
What are the best hairstyles for a round face?
From the passage provided, extract the date that National Beer Day is celebrated in the United States.
Who is the company Adecco
Which of the following items does not look the same as the others? Banana, orange, plum, pomegranate, watermelon.
Who invented Calculus?
What are the top Sports Movies ever?
What are the native animals of Antarctica?
Where can I find more information on Tau?
What is genomic medicine?
Create a workout to strengthen my upper body
List the types of pasta that can be used to make carbonara
What qualities do Australian Cattle Dogs have?
What is AWS ECS?
my health insurance covers preventative procedures like vaccines 100%. But I know some health care providers charge a "visit fee" in addition to the vaccine fee. What's the difference between getting a vaccine in a clinic and a pharmacy? Will getting a vaccine in a clinic (such as minute clinics) result in charges?
Why do many people spend so much time on their smartphone everyday?
Which of the following are planets? Sun, Mars, Moon, Pluto, Jupiter, Neptune
What is a cookie?
Why invest in the stock market?
How do I improve my leadership skills?
How to learn or do something complex?
What is compound weightlifting?
Why are plant leaves green?
Based on the paragraph below, please list out the 2 major causes supported by Kelly Slater.
Have you heard of Malibamat'so River and where does it flow?
What is the plot of the movie John Wick?
Classify the below based on the mode of transportation.
bus, car, taxi, train, helicopter, boat, ship
Does Twitter ever break their own rules?
Give me a list of popular tourist attractions in Rome
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Jhallari, Chitarra battente
Why is my car making a clicking sound when I try to start it? The lights are turning on for a little bit but the engine is not turning over. My car is not that old!
What are the typical subjects that are studied in grade school in America?
What type of rock climbing is best?
Name five capital cities in Europe.
What does a typical meal look like
Who is the greatest golfer ever?
What was the The McIntosh County Seat War
Assume the email format is {first_initial}{last_name}@somecompany.com

What would the email addresses be for the following people?
Jon Doe
Richard Smith
Tom Jenkins
Nick Parsons
How do you cook sous vide?
Classify the below states based on east or west coast.
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, Alaska, Hawaii
What is Economics?
How many grand slams did Boris Becker win?
When was scala created?
What is an Aeolosaurini?
What are the things I should consider when purchasing an electric car?
Tell me some of the rivers that flow through Europe, in alphabetical order.
I'm going to try a keto diet, which means I should prioritise fat and avoid carbs. Which of these foods should I prioritise and which should I avoid? rice, mayonnaise, avocado, pastry, olive oil, bread, cheese and crackers.
From the passage provided, extract detail on when John Rennie first led Duke to a NCAA college cup
Give me a list of the best books to read for new real estate investors
What are some of the oldest civilizations starting?
What is the oldest civilization in the world?
Using the given text, summarize the main features of the Fender Stratocaster
From the above passage, provide some of the examples of black swan events. List the events in a bulleted list.
Who is LBJ?
Given a reference text about Margot Robbie, tell me when they were born and what they are famous for.
Why do humans fall in love?
What's so great about St Martin?
When is the best time to catch Bass in Michigan?
Which of the following are in the X-men: Wolverine, Cyclops, Gandalf, He-man and Gambit
Who is Manchester United's current manager?
Which is a species of fish? Bleak or Weary
Who is the greatest artist of all time?
What are some melee weapons I can use for role playing?
Which Gene in the body is responsible for a persons height
What video beat "Thriller" for Video of the Year at the first-ever MTV Video Music Awards?
What are the different payment methods for payment inside a US store?
What are the generations of the Ford Bronco?
Why is the Republican Party against gun control legislation?
Who finished the Wheel of Time series?
What are the most successful Premier League football teams?
What is the Metropolitan College of New York?
Jill, a 60-year-old personal training client, wants to improve her hip flexibility. Can a foam roller target hip flexibility? Suggest an exercise she could perform with this
equipment to meet that objective.
Change this to future tense
Given this reference text, in which year was the youth novel by R.M. Ballantyne - which inspired Golding's first novel - written?
What are good foods for keto diet
What is the purpose of life?
I'm at a board game shop and want to buy a game that either requires physical skill or economic strategy. Here are the available games: Pictionary, Monopoly, Trivial Pursuit, Jenga, Operation, Catan, Diplomacy and Hungry Hippos. Give me a shortlist.
What did Deneen do in her teens?
When was the french revolution
What is a credit card?
Fissures, vents, and plugs are all associated with which geological feature?
How to decide what type of dog you want to purchase or adopt?
Given a reference text about Sintok, tell me where it is located.
Tell me whether this is a list of flowers or trees: oak, aspen, fir, maple, and redwood.
Are you going for a walk today?
Group the following words into two categories, 'positive' or 'negative' based on the sentiment: efficient, helpful, slow, horrible, fantastic, disappointing, confusing, lovely, excellent.
What links Catalonia, Andalusia, Cantabria, Galicia
What kind of college is the Alpha Eta Rho
From the passage provided, determine who and when the first definition of thermodynamics was formulated.
What is muscular hypertrophy?
Are you going for a walk today?
Arrange these weapons from oldest to newest, based on the date they were first invented.

Sword
Nuclear Bomb
Hand Axe
Gatling Gun
Rifle
Draft an e-mail to a resort inquiring about information regarding a vow renewal celebration for my wife and me.
Classify each of the following teams as college or professional: Florida Gators, Miami Marlins, Miami Hurricanes, Jacksonville Jaguars, Georgia Bulldogs, Atlanta Braves, Tampa Rays
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Puertasaurus, Southern rockhopper penguin
Give me a bulleted list of the 7 most recent UPenn Presidents
What is the difference between an asset and a liability.
What were all the earlier names for the city presently known as Chennai?
With which countries does Indonesia share borders?
Who was Roy Cameron? When and where did he work?
Tell me about the history of how the NBA started?
How does meditation help?
Classify each score as "Under Par" or "Over Par" in golf: Eagle, Bogey, Double Eagle, Hole in One, Triple Bogey, Birdie
Where is Ecsenius tessera commonly found?
What are three crafts with a wire coat hanger?
Why did Rome have so many bad emperors?
Who won the India’s highest literary award 56th Jnanpith award
What is the best NFL football team of all time?
Please give me a summary of what AES-GCM is and what are its inputs and outputs.
Where should you visit in Belize if you are looking for a nice beach?
What is Credit scoring?
How much energy is released in a deuterium-tritium fusion reaction?
If there are only two genera remaining, what happened to the other 24?
Which sea on Earth has no beaches
What year did the Titanic sink?
Where should I go on my honeymoon?
What is A State of Trance?
Tell me if these are TV shows or Movies: Breaking Bad, Dexter, Game of thrones, Fight Club.
Given these paragraphs about battery storage power stations, how much was able to store and dispatch the first phase of Vistra Energy's Moss Landing Energy Storage Facility?
Given the introduction of ChatGPT, tell me how many releases there are since the fist launch and when they were launched.
Please give me a short bulleted list of the theories that explain different aspects of the relationship between the work and family life made in this passage.
Classify each of the following as either a natural hair color or a grocery store bakery brand: Hostess, blonde, brunette, Betty Crocker, Pilsbury, red, black, Entenmann's
Where is Mount Everest?
What is a good anime to watch for someone who has never watched anime before?
What is the SECA Art Award?
Why is wine country in Northern California a great place to travel?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cowbell, Crwth
Classify each as a chip or a cracker: Goldfish, Doritos, Cheez-It, Cheetos.
How important is pilot communication with a non-towered controlled airport?
What are four creative ways to use a chess set besides playing chess?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kepyak, Koto
What is your biggest pet peeve when using email filters to organize your Inbox?
Who is the company Sonova
Which NFL team has the most Super Bowl championship wins?
Classify each of the following Hogwarts students in the houses Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and Slytherin: Harry Potter, Hermione Granger, Neville Longbottom, Ronald Weasley, Fred Weasley, George Weasley, Percy Weasley, Charles Weasley, Ginny Weasley, Seamus Finnigan, Oliver Wood, Angelina Johnson, Alicia Spinnet, Katie Bell, Andrew Kirke, Jack Sloper, Demelza Robins, Dean Thomas,  Cedric Diggory, Zacharias Smith, Ernie Macmillan, Hannah Abbott, Justin Finch-Fletchley, Susan Bones, Zacharias Smith, Luna Lovegood, Marcus Belby, Cho Chang, Myrtle Warren, Padma Patil, Terry Boot, Michael Corner, Roger Davies, Anthony Goldstein, Marietta Edgecombe, Robert Hilliard, Penelope Clearwater, Lisa Turpin, Morag MacDougal, Mandy Brocklehurst, Nanette Desford, Maria Glossop, Millicent Bagnold, Sue Li, Ignatia Wildsmith, Chester Davies, Tulip Karasu, Badeea Ali, Talbott Winger, Andre Egwu, Adelaide Murton, Adrian Pucey, Aesop Sharp, Barnaby Lee, Blaise Zabini, Felix Rosier, Gemma Farley, Ismelda Murk, Liz Tuttle, Marcus Flint, Merula Snyde, Millicent Bulstrode, Pansy Parkinson, Terence Higgs, Tracey Davis, Tom Riddle, Viola Richmond, Yatin Bhagat, Yurika Haneda, Zoe Accrington, Zubeida Khan
Classify each of the following among a country, a continent, both, none:  america, north america, australia, london, india, china
What team has won the most Stanley Cups?
What should I eat when I visit South India ?
Describe ZMOT (Zero moment of truth) and how it differs from the 3-step model of marketing that was prevalent at the time of its introduction.
When was MIT founded?
How many continents are there on Earth?
What are the four seasons, and what month does each season start in New York City?
A dialogue between two characters discussing the impact of social media on their lives. Both positive and negative points
Tell me which of these are served hot or cold: soup, ice cream, potato salad, mashed potatoes, cake, cheese platter
Where do the Kardashians live?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Dubai
Which of the following numbers are odd and which are even: 1, 35, 72, 64, 103, 29, 16, 41, 22
Name five fire Pokemon.
Extract from the text the various names that the Six Nations Championship has had throughout history with the beginning and end dates for each name and list them using bullet points ordered by beginning dates in the format {Beginning Date} / {End Date} - {Name}
Historically, what are the largest animals on earth? Please include dinosaurs
What is the Azure equivalent of EKS?
How has McDonald's target audience changed over time?
What hemispheres is the United States in?
What are some good flowers to plant in Hardiness Zone 7?
Why did the cow jump over the moon?
What film won Best Picture at the 95th Academy Awards in 2023?
What are some dishes that avocados can be used in?
Given this paragraph about a singer, what was Rihanna's first album?
Who is TIME
For Bronze layer, how do you suggest handling the data sources that are coming as JSON/CSV/Avro, etc. (Onprem SQL data imported as json via Azure Data Factory into ADLS Or API Calls that return JSON) Should that be stored without processing in bronze layer in ADLS/Process them and store as Delta in bronze or should we have a pre bronze layer?
Who is using Spark in production?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Derkach, Lyra
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Gravikord, Heckelphone
Classify each of these movies as being for adults or for kids.
What religion is the oldest in the world?
Given a reference text about Stevan L. Davies, tell me where he went to college.
what traditional process does Cyber PHA follow given this information?
Classify the movies based on whether they were released in 2001 or 2002.

Albela, Lagaan, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham, Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam, Devdas, Na Tum Jaano Na Hum
Provide key stats about Venus in a bulleted list including days to orbit the sun, mean temperature, number of moons orbiting the planet, and primary element in its atmosphere
What are some of the must-visit places in Tohoku, Japan?
Why is the SEC the best football conference in America?
Classify the animals based on their food habits.
Lion, Tiger, Cow, Goat, Deer
Which member of *NSYNC was a replacement for another who quit before they got big?
What are fun activities to do with a toddler in Los Angeles?
Did Thomas Attewell bat with a right or left hand?
Which of the numbers 1 through 10 are prime numbers?
Give me a list of 10 books on building better habits
How should I sleep train my baby?
List the Hindi television series by Ekta Kapoor.
Which are the main reasons for doing a PhD?
What's one way biotechnology was used in world war one?
Where does Delta Lake store the data?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands or Dominican Republic.
Santiago, Santo Domingo Este, Santo Domingo, Grytviken
Give me a list of the best true crime podcast to listen to
what are ISO compliant crypto currencies?
Why is Captain America Steve Rogers the leader of the Avengers?
Explain to your 6 year son why its ok to fail few times only to get better later
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Sivatherium, Bowhead Whale
what is typical enterprise sales person comp mix between base and commission?
please tell me about the golden gate bridge without quoting directly from this text
Based on the following passage, what did Albert Einstein publish in 1905?
What is "strokes gained" in golf?
Which is a species of fish? Boar or Boarfish
last 5 prime minister of India
What is transistor technology?
Tell me about the plot to Harry Potter
In what year did Endless Nights come out?
What kind of disease is wheat mildew
Please give me a comma separated list of the countries that signed the North Atlantic Treaty in April 1949 given the text below
Where is the Kilo railway station
Classify the Disney movie characters into the movies that they appeared in.
Anna, Mufasa, Kristoff, Nemo, Scar, Simba, Dory
What is the best color ?
Given this paragraph about Aronia, what is another name for the plant and where were they first cultivated?
What does Thai Songkran festival represents and how many days does it last?
Does Spark support JavaScript?
What are toe beans?
Tell me about the career of David Allen Laycock
What is the Spengler Cup
Give me a list of scientists who influenced the work of Albert Einstein
What kind of bears can you see in the Katmai National Park and Preserve?
How many voyages did Columbus lead to America?
Which country produces the most wine on an annual basis?
How many sinking ships did Violet Jessop survive? Be precise.
Label each of the following as either a movie or a documentary: RRR, John Wick, Man on Wire, Creed, Our Planet, Tales by Light, Luther, Becoming.
What is a beard?
Extract the different ways of dealing with underfitting mentioned in the text
What is India's rank in Global Gender Gap Index 2022
Who did the French national football team play against in the last 3 matches of the 2018 World Cup and how did the matches turn out?
Was Tyler Thompson a diplomat
Prepare the count of trains which serves Mount Prospect for each day in a week starting with Monday. Use the format “Day-Count” and each entry should be in a new line.
Who won the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences?
Which of these are most likely to be found in a hotel room: lamp, bed, gerbil, coffee pot, dishwasher, ancient relic?
What are the most common food allergies?
How large are elephant eggs?
What is Star Alliance
My trophy does not fit my suitcase because it is to big.  I need to travel.  What could I do?
Who is the lead singer of the Gorillaz?
Which is the most popular Italian Song Festival
What professional football team play in red and blue and are based in south london?
Given this paragraph about John C. Young, where did he go to college?
What is Edison famous for?
How can I thicken my soup recipe?
Extract the current cash rate and basis point increase from the following using the format: {x} % increased by {x} basis points

At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 3.60 per cent. It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to 3.50 per cent.
Global inflation remains very high. In headline terms it is moderating, although services price inflation remains elevated in many economies. It will be some time before inflation is back to target rates. The outlook for the global economy remains subdued, with below average growth expected this year and next.
The monthly CPI indicator suggests that inflation has peaked in Australia. Goods price inflation is expected to moderate over the months ahead due to both global developments and softer demand in Australia. Services price inflation remains high, with strong demand for some services over the summer. Rents are increasing at the fastest rate in some years, with vacancy rates low in many parts of the country. The central forecast is for inflation to decline this year and next, to be around 3 per cent in mid-2025. Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and it is important that this remains the case.
Growth in the Australian economy has slowed, with GDP increasing by 0.5 per cent in the December quarter and 2.7 per cent over the year. Growth over the next couple of years is expected to be below trend. Household consumption growth has slowed due to the tighter financial conditions and the outlook for housing construction has softened. In contrast, the outlook for business investment remains positive, with many businesses operating at a very high level of capacity utilisation.
How do you thicken bolognese sauce?
What did Franz Beckenbauer call Bobby Moore?
What is the difference between a fried egg prepared "sunny-side-up" and an egg prepared "over-easy"?
In the given text, List down some important points about Pope Adrian V
From the given text, write some important points about guitar's vibrato system
Given a reference text about Chadwick, Illinois, tell me median family income and the percent of families below the poverty line.
How does a push rod internal combustion engine work?
When was bowling believed to have been invented?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tsuzumi, Auto-harp
How can I support a loved one going through anxiety and depression?
Why is standard guitar tuning EADGBE?
What characterizes turbulent flow
Based on the provided text, In what year did the National Gallery of Ireland open its doors to the public and what kind of art is it known for?
Based on this paragraph about the early career of John C. Young (pastor), after the resignation of which whom was Young offered the presidency of Centre College in Danville, Kentucky?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Deadpool or Deadstroke
Which is a species of fish? Snapper or Tapper
Identify the bird from the list: Cockroach, Hawfinch, Humpback whale
What famous surfers have died while surfing?
How do you fix a puncture on a Mountain Bike?
I have wine tasting plans for the weekend , give me some tips so that I look like an expert
Extract the retirement age in France, Germany, Sweden, Austria, and Poland for men and women.
Bowling achievements of Andrew Kyle
How to people buy parts for classic cars that are no longer in production?
If you were to design a pantheon, how many gods or deities would you include?
Extract the theories for why the Mary Celeste was abandoned.
If you could change one thing about this world, what would it be and why?
What are the futures?
What are agents in the matrix and what is their relationship to sentinels?
What kind of grand prix is the 1932 Australian Grand Prix
How was the San Francisco bay created?
Could you describe who is BNP Paribas (BNPP)?
Find the four eye shapes on Maitum anthropomorphic pottery and separate them with a comma
Can dogs talk?
Give me a list of some US Army training schools
What is a snowball?
Of the living animal species which have been described, which group has the most?
Extract the names of the islands located on the Central Group of the Azores plateau from the text. Separate them with a comma.
List five titles by Jules Vernes.
When does human life begin?
Which of these drinks are caffeinated: water, coffee, tea, laptop, orange juice, lemonade, pre workout.
Give me a list of the best animals one can have for a pet, starting with the best pet first.
What are three popular women's fashion rental services?
How can you take good star photos?
What are the advantages of using a keyboard and mouse for first person shooters when gaming on a PC?
What are the benefits of minimally-invasive orthopedic surgery?
What is the movie The Airzone Solution
What are the best things to do when visiting Los Angeles?
What is the difference between a GPU and a CPU?
How do you juggle?
distinguish the following famous people as authors and dancers:
Gregory Hines
Danielle Steele
JK Rowling
Lee Child
Patrick Swayze
Martha graham
Leo Tolstoy
Michael Flatly
Paulo Cohelo
Michael Jackson
List the business verticals of Reliance Industries Limited as per the passage. Display the result as a dashed list.
On a trip to the beach, what can I do to prevent getting sun burned?
What is Hispania
Tell me about the inversion in postcolonial theory
What are all the way one can travel from Boston to Philadelphia
Of the statements listed, identify the ones that show politically bias: I think Trump is a better leader, I think you should vote for Biden, Modi is the leader India needs now, I am almost Liberal, Leftist propoganda, democrats are better, Global warming is a myth, I like meat, you should drink milk, cows should be protected, I support a certain religion, LGBTQ rights are important, people of color need to be represented, immigrants help the country, gun laws are needed
What plants and animals are native to Arches National Park
Think of 5 shades of blue I could paint my room
Which of the following city has the highest historical monuments?
Why would a person from Switzerland immigrate to the California?
Which is a bird or fish: Blackcap, Black swallower
What are some of the basic investment strategy for a new investor
What year was the movie Big Trouble in Little China released?
Who are the best wide receivers on the San Francisco 49ers?
What is the movie The Fabelmans about?
do successful companies become public?
Explain what is April Fools' Day?
What is the most dangerous spider?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Maybach, Panoz
Give me some ideas for what to do for a kids Easter party.
What are the primary causes of obesity in the US?
Why pink Floyd is so famous
What was the compelling event that shut down the IRRI station?
Why Kolkata is famous
Who brews Shiner Bock beer?
What is New Zealand's most well-known wine that it produces?
Who are the World Cup champions?
Who is considered the bachelor president of the United States?
Where in the US are the most renowned Pinot Noir wines produced?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Superman, Thor
What are examples of endocrine disruptors?
What are some of the most efficient programing languages?
Finish the sentence from the book 1984: Big ____ is watching you!
Does EV help address the energy crisis?
Find the bird in this list: Arctic skua, Monkey, Lily
What is CloudFormation?
Which of the current Girl Scout cookies is based on one of the original Girl Scout cookies?
What is Sea Hear Now
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Chile or Antigua and Barbuda.
Concepción, Saint John’s, Santiago, Puente Alto
In what part of the world could you find wild bonobos?
What year did humankind walk on the moon?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Paiban, Fegereng
What is the fastest or speediest animal?
Given this paragraph about David Bowie, in which decade might you describe his music as having peaked?
Who was the first man to walk on the moon?
What was the most expensive watch ever sold at auction
Why is healthcare so bad in US?
Correct the typos in this sentence
Why was Abraham Lincoln a great President?
How large is South Africa's economy?
What kind of espresso machine is best for home use?
What new car should I buy for my family?
Who is Edgar Allen Poe?
What is a typical day for a software engineer like?
What marks the change from prehistory to  history?
What are three upper body exercises you can do without any weights?
Give me 5 major attractions to see in Berlin
Who is Scarlett Johansson
From the passage provided, extract the gross earnings of the movie Iron Man
What is the population of St. Paul?
Can you potty train a bunny?
The Gulbenkian Prize for  Humanity was given to whom?
Recommend some good Dreampop music.
Determine if the following states are East or West of the Mississippi River: Michigan, Georgia, Virginia, Oregon, Colorado, New Jersey, Nebraska, Texas.
What is CJIS?
Why are people so excited about SpaceX?
What is the first name of Stephen Curry?
What is Sogndal?
What's the difference between the weather in California compared to New York
What is a Google Pixel?
What is the plot of Yu-Gi-Oh?
Tell me some important points about AICF from the given passage.
Give me a list of several scenic countries that you should visit.
How comes a free-diver does not get crushed by the pressure when diving?
You are on vacation and your newborn leaves something behind in the hotel room. Which of the following items would be something your newborn would have left behind: pacifier, blanket, 747 Jet, golf clubs, vodka, milk, iPad, cell phone
What are some of the challenges when walking with crutches?
Who won the 2022 NBA Finals?
It's your child's birthday, write a message on social media to express your happiness and celebrate their special day
What are some of the most common social norms in the United States?
Where can I find a bristly bellflower in the wild?
In 93rd Academy Awards(Oscar Awards)The Best Picture award was given to whom?
From the passage provided, extract the year Apache Software Foundation was incorporated on.
Who is the 46th president of the United States?
What US embassy was abandoned on April 12th, 1975
Why do so many people live along coastlines?
Which Game of Thrones season three episodes were directed by Michelle MacLaren?
give me a list of ways some one can warm up
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Stritch, Zhu
When was the first idea of mobile phone developed, and was it created or commercialized at that time?
What is IPL T20?
Which of these countries are in Europe, Asia or both?

Sweden
Russia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Turkey
India
Austria
Kyrgyzstan
Iran
Italy
Austria
What are transistors made from?
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
5 best mailing sites
Find an item from each category bellow that somehow relates to a banana.

place
animal
vehicle
feeling
food
tech
song
movie
Using the following text, list the top 4 drugs by revenue for Pfizer in 2022?
How do you train for a marathon?
What is Collateral?
What is a spatial network?
Who is the Disney character named Grogu?
Think of a lot of different ways you could tell your roommate about something you need to buy at the store.
Tell me whether the following politicians are associated with California or Florida: Kamala Harris, Nancy Pelosi, Ron DeSantis, Marco Rubio, Charlie Christ, Diane Feinstein, Gavin Newsom
Who are co-founders of Google?
What are considered some of the hippest cities in the United States?
How to understand or classify Indian film industry?
Which product is part of the Security & Governance model in Lakehouse and which is used for Datawarehouse in Delta Lake? Unity Catalog, SQL endpoint, Serverless SQL, Storage credential.
What causes that feeling of weightlessness when you're on a rollercoaster?
Write a polite rejection response to a LinkedIn recruiter
Why is free climbing called free climbing?
What are some sound personal financial practices to employ in the modern economy?
Which of the following are fruits and which are vegetables, from this list: Tomatoes, Carrots, Onions, Broccoli, Mushrooms, Cauliflower, Cabbage, Chives, Grapes, Sausages?
What can I do at the airport?
Give me the instructions on how to escape a labyrinth
what are capers
Classify each of the following as either a citrus fruit or non citrus-fruit: apples, pears, watermelons, lemons, clementines, mandarines
What's the significance of the lighthouse in Virginia Woolf's "In The Lighthouse?"
Give me 3 ways you can cook eggs
Given this paragraph about grunge guitarists, what types of amplifiers would typically be preferred?
Give me a list of the best French rugby players ever
Tell me whether each animal has feathers or hair: falcon, pigeon, chimpanzee, cat, cardinal, hamster, horse
Who is Antonio Jose de Sucre?
What is the legal drinking age?
Who was given EY Entrepreneur of the year award 2020 ?
Make a list of several games I could play with two friends
When did the gallipoli campaign take place?
How many seasons did Shaq have over 30 ppg
What's the capital city of Czechoslovakia?
What are some of the best science fiction movies of all time?
How do I apply for a single-entry e-visa to Uzbekistan as a US citizen for tourism? What potential pitfalls do I need to look out for?
Why did my cookies turn out flat?
I want to buy a new car. This is a difficult financial decision, but our car is 12 years old. Can you write some reasons I can give to my partner so she's on board with this decision.
Think up different types of places to go for vacation.
What is Chess?
In English do adjectives go before or after nouns they describe?
Extract the stages for portfolio optimization from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portfolio_optimization
What are some ways to get promoted at your job?
Paul McCartney and John Lennon wrote which Rolling Stones song?
Which company built the F-22 Raptor?
Given a reference text about Raul Axente Ciupe, tell me what country he is from and what position he played.
What is Beggar's Chicken?
What is a synonym for something which is eco friendly?
Who were fighting each other in this battle and what's the consequence of it
What is type 1 diabetes?
How long does it take me from the city center of Munich to the football stadium?
Why did naatu naatu get oscar for best original song?
What is the capital of Mongolia?
How was Elon Musk involved in Paypal?
Who was Lawrence Grant White?
What are the top semiconductor companies?
From the passage mention the services provided by Jio. Also consider the services to be provided in future. Display the results in comma separated format.
What are some lazy meals I can cook at home?
Why did TSMC choose Arizona for its chip manufacturing
Why do human beings react slow on climate changes?
What are some of the best outdoor experiences in Italy?
What kind of weather do people prefer?
Name some recurring villains on the TV show "The X-Files."
Is breakfast cereal a healthy food choice in the morning?
From this text, find out the pros and cons of dredging
History of Linux
What is freedom?
Name some of the bravolebrities from Below Deck
If I am traveling from Berkeley to San Francisco, what are the public transit options?
Tell me whether these are artists or football players: Andy Warhol, Joe Montana, Jackson Pollock, Tom Brady, Mark Rothko.
Who is the best soccer player in the world?
Who is the Cigarette Smoking Man?
Give me some ideas of where I should go on holiday.
why is hydration so important?
What was the Ghazi Attack in Indian subcontinent?
Why is Chicago so windy?
What is Lady Gaga's real name?
When was Lure of the Swamp released?
Share some details about paris city from the given text.
In The Divergent series by Veronica Roth, what is the name used to refer to people who don't fit into a specific faction?
What are the top graph databases?
Give me an overview of the inspiration of the development of Barbie based on this passage
What is XGBoost Algorithm?
What's a romatic poem about the universe and time?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Makuta, Tricordia
What should I do this spring in San Francisco?
Group the following into manmade and non-manmade (naturally occurring) items: computer, salt, fence, tree stump, hillock, lightbulb, terracotta planter, snow, wolves, tablecloth, periodicals, museum
Write an email to a butcher asking how much and what types of meats would be best for a BBQ for 20 people. And ask for a quote.
I'm about to leave San Francisco and I love my rickety old apartment. Write it a tribute and make it poetic!
What are the differences between acoustic guitars and classic guitars?
What is COCOMO
How can I treat a cough without medication?
When was the Roman empire founded?
As per the passage whose works did Narendranath study?
Where are good places to go for vacation?
How is the film Merrily We Roll Along being filed?
Where is John Rahm from?
How many people in total were killed or injured in this text?
What are nice things to do for someone on their birthday?
What is Akshardham?
How do I cook basmati rice?
Give me a short summary of the movie Gladiator.
Is crocodile a reptile or an amphibian?
Where is Dieveniskes located
Give me tips on how to stick to habits?
How often should I walk my adult dog?
What does CMWCs stand for?
Given this reference text about Nintendo, when was it founded?
Are panda bears real bears?
Do you have to get training to go scuba diving?
What are the FAANG companies?
What is alternative rock?
What are the qualities of a good manager?
Tell me whether these teams have ever won the Champions League: Real Madrid, Manchester United, Manchester City, Liverpool, Paris Saint-Germain
Why is Dungeons and Dragons so popular nowadays?
Van Halen (/væn ˈheɪlɛn/ van HAY-len) was an American rock band formed in Pasadena, California, in 1973. Credited with "restoring hard rock to the forefront of the music scene", Van Halen was known for its energetic live shows and for the virtuosity of its lead guitarist, Eddie Van Halen. The band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2007.
Name some famous songs by George Gershwin
How is binary search vs other searching schemes?
What are the names of the Stark children's direwolves?
Give me a random bulleted list of ten landlocked countries
My manager is available on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday after 12 PM PST and her manager is available on Wednesday after 4:30 PM CST and Thursday from 3:30 PM to 4:30 PM CST. Can you suggest a time for me to schedule a meeting with the two of them if I have to sign off at 5 PM EST every day?
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of the government?
What is a stinky slinky?
Name some of the bravolebrities from Summer house
What are the ways you can eat an apple.
when was the Playstation 5 announced?
Can you help me to categorize these things as either "expensive", "not expensive", or "I don't know": air, gold, rock, rocket and dream.
who is tamil nadu super star ?
How can I find accurate directions between two places?
What do you know about the Fatimid Empire?
Who sings the song "Riptide"?
Why was Tingri important for Nepalese people based on the following text?
Which is a bird or fish: Red snapper or Red kite
What is Lorraine
Based on the following passage what is alternating current affected by?
Classify each of the following as "Vegetarian Friendly" or "Not Vegetarian Friendly": chicken, peanuts, eggs, bacon, sausage, lettuce, ketchup
As a 16-year old high school student, write a short summary of your visit to the Vermeer exhibition in the Rijksmuseum.
Give me the list of 'The Lord of the Rings' movie series by Peter Jackson director. Ordered chronologically by the events happening in the series.
Name the vocalists of Vengaboys.
How to remove limescale from showers and taps?
What are some rules of Slack etiquette?
Write a brief passage arguing for the use of genetically modified crops in agriculture.
Who is Sasha? How does her life compare to Becky?
What is the best way to store food?
Please summarize President Joe Biden's statement below.
What role did barrels of benzol play in the explosion of the Mont-Blanc?
Classify each of the following as a Country, State, or City: Saint Louis, Detroit, Alabama, Washington, Washington D.C., Alaska, Canada, Mexico, Mexico City, Toronto, Florida, Boise
What food is served at a Mexican restaurant?
Which exchanges is RELX listed on?
What is a Haiku?
What is the main difference between decoder only transformer and encoder only transformer?
When was Scarlett Johansson born?
give me a list of counties in Virginia by population
What are the benefits of in-person learning versus online?
Who is the singer of the song I'm So Excited?
What hit song that was used in the Bollywood movie Don actually a reject from an earlier movie.
Is the following state true or false: Peanuts are vegetables?
How does someone win the Tough Guy Contest?
What is the word that suggests the sound that it describes?
Give me a list of the best places in the United States to go skiing
How many quarters do you need to have three dollars?
Why do developers like Agile?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Nuralagus, Black Spider Monkey
Give me a numbered list of the named characters in the following passage.
How to be a good software engineer?
What is the legal drinking age in the USA?
How do I calm down a toddler when they are having a tantrum?
Which one of these do not belong to the group:  Tomato, Carrot, Ginger, Potato, Turmeric
Please summarize Sinclair's argument in this paragraph for why longer lifespans will not lead to overpopulation.
Why is American Football popular?
How many books are there in the Harry Potter series?
Other than Tanki, how many other known Amerindian settlements are on Aruba?
What is considered as  Emma Edmondson's best work as an actress?
Who sold more CDs in 2016 than Beyonce?
Which of the following are cities in Australia: Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, Canberra, Rio de Janeiro, Beijing, Shanghai, New York, Singapore, Germany, United States, Tokyo
Is it safe to drink water out of a creek?
Why does moon change its shape?
Which of these programming languages is different from the others : C++, Java, Go, Scala
How many rounds are played in a professional golf tournament?
List some reasons why cats are the best pets.
Which is the most popular sport in India?
How should I go about planning a trip to Europe?
How would you train for a marathon?
Classify each of the following as flexible or inflexible: gymnast, yoga instructor, steel, rubber, leather, wood
Classify these various instruments as either percussion or woodwind instruments: flute, clarinet, drum, bassoon, marimba, cymbal
What is the Forever War about?
What is another name for the Great Pyramid in Egypt?
Tell me whether these Pokemon are fairy or poison type: Clefable, Jigglypuff, Rapidash, Arbok, Nidorino, Zubat
Extract references to electric fish in ancient texts from the following passage.
Why is Stephen A. Smith a great journalist?
Where is located the Roberson Museum and Science Center?
What is the most popular female dog name
Which is a bird or fish: Yellow-legged gull, Yellowfin tuna
Give me a bulleted list of the 5 most recent UK Prime Ministers
Given the reference article, Please give marriage date of indian actor Shahrukh Khan
What are the important points about Lunar eclipse in the given text?
From the passage provided, extract the FAO measurements for hunger. Separate them with a comma.
Who is Brandon Sanderson?
Describe how you planned a father and son high school senior trip
Given this text about James Pressdee, tell me what sports they played, which awards they won, when they were born, and if they are still alive.
Tell me what is a good manager and a bad manager: Sympathy, open, democratic, Micro management, always show trust, always show doubt, intimidating
Who does the Navy Cross is awarded to?
What is a metaverse?
First, it's important to know what your goal is with a bicycle. If you go out with the family, you can choose a regular bicycle, but if you go to use for competition, it is better to choose a more sophisticated carbon fiber bicycle, for gain more performance in races.
I want to plan a vacation in summer. How do I know where I can go?
What's the capital of Brazil?
What is the origin of Flamenco?
How to evaluate an equation with multiple operations?
What are Calories, and what is the difference between good and bad calories?
How do you know if a chicken breast is fully cooked?
How many episodes of the second season of Game of Thrones did Alan Taylor direct?
What are the most important figures in the passage provided about Singapore? Please provide in bullet points.
Tell me whether each of these wine regions is in California or Italy: Napa, Sonoma, Healdsburg, Tuscany, Veneto
Extract the Greek terms in the following paragraph, along with a short definition, in bullet points.
Give me a list of books that are long and hard to read. The sort of books with which I could impress someone who read a lot.
Given this paragraph, who won the Montenegro presidential elections and how much of the vote did they receive in each runoff round?
Based on this passage, why is Chris Kuroda's nickname CK5?
What is IFSC?
What are some tools to help combat ADD and ADHD?
How much more did the house cost than originally planned? Express as an absolute or nominal difference, not as a percentage.
Is the Ironbottom Sound a boardgame
Did the dome last as long as it was designed for?
Given a reference text about Gaya Island, how many hiking trails and 5 star resorts are on the island?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Given this text about Battlefield 3 on Wikipedia, what was the included classes you could play as in the game?
Who are the almohad
Which is a species of fish? Marlin or Doberman
What are the national languages of Switzerland?
What is the name of the largest train station in Amsterdam
What is the capital of Georgia?
What are some geographical and topological features of the Bajardo comune described on this text?
Given a reference text about the Eurovision Song Contest 1987, tell me where it took place, and how many countries participated.
Given this reference text, how old was Trey Anastasio when he co-founded Phish?
Who is the protagonist in CyberPunk 2077?
Which two U.S. states don’t observe Daylight Saving Time?
What is Inflation?
Who is best college football coach?
What is the primary source of energy for heating homes in the Northeast United States.
Which names below are more used for boys or girls in 2023
what method of commuting works best to get from Marin County to downtown San Francisco?
classify each of the following as either a city or a county: usa, mexico, cananda, syracuse, austin, mumbai, japan, tokyo
Given this paragraph about the Golden Records, tell me what it is, where it is heading, who/when created it.
What are some of the achievements of James Hightower
What are the main impacts to the earth as a result of climate change.
How to get entrance to Istanbul from US?
In total how long was Winston Churchill the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
Write a story about a dark and scary night.
What changes needs to be done in H1b lottery process
What were the top 5 best-selling British sports cars manufactured by British Leyland?
What is Lean manufacturing
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Atumpan, Axatse, Baryton
What are 5 really good golf ball brands for amateur players
Write a short story about a man who discovers a partially built treehouse.
Tell me when Silvio Berlusconi was born, how long has he been Prime Minister in Italy and what his nickname is
What kind of animal is the Diaea dorsata
How long does a tennis match take?
What is GeneBass?
How do I pick the best bananas?
From the passage list down the various Gods whom Bhrigu visited. List the results in comma separated format.
Tell which of these musicians is a guitarist or a bassist:  Eddie Van Halen, Nikki Sixx, Steve Harris, Billy Sheehan, Steve Vai, Joe Satriani, Matthias Jabs, Jimmy Bain, Mick Mars, Vivian Campbell, Angus Young
What is the launch date of Artemis mission?
Retrieve the teams Doug Pederson was affiliated with as a coach
What is the fundamental problem of economics as a discipline?
Lauren is a 32-year-old women who weighs 166 lbs and has never participated in resistance training. She participated in an initial fitness assessment and wants your advice about starting a muscular fitness program at your exercise facility. Design a resistance training routine for Lauren to help her achieve moderate gains in both muscular strength and endurance.
From the passage provided, extract the names of the co-founders of Hadoop. Separate them with a comma.
What did the note in Hermione's hand say when she was found petrified in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets?
If I wanted a play games with my computer, what components should I pay attention to?
What is Foreverly?
How many parts were brand new in the Porsche 993?
Do you know how many episodes of Game of Thrones are there?
Can you extract the 5 most important characteristics of the moon from this literature in a single paragraph?
How many Children Trump has?
What are the administrative divisions in Morocco ?
Give me a list of the last ten Grammy Award for Best New Artist winners.
My coffee tastes too acidic, what can I do to balance it out?
Which movie(s) inspired the 2019 DC comic movie Joker?
What does the Horse Statue in Ground Zero Represent?
What is Chinese Eduction System like?
Write a poem about a cat owner who gets transported to a parallel universe where highly advanced cats keep humans as pets.
On a golf course where are the holes?
What is the best Engineering college in Bangalore?
Are Air Fryers safe to use?
What is the largest employer in the world?
How do I make a custom-shaped rug?
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Lamborghini, Chrysler
What books has David Duchovny written?
What is audit in finance?
Why india is so Poor Country
What sports can I play in Summer?
What is the “yacht rock” genre of music?
What is an API gateway?
What are some of the languages spoken in India?
What are 5 fitness tips that will help me lose weight
What towns make up Cape Ann?
From the passage provided, how old was Betty White when she died?
Categorize the below in terms of avocado or apple types.
Hass, Fuerte, Zutano, Fuji, Gala
What is a dam?
Tell me about Reno, Nevada.
Fidelity Bravery Integrity is which organisations motto
What is primary innovation that a piano delivered over a harpsichord?
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
Show me the current P4P boxer ratings in the world
What is the biggest land mammal?
What is Riot Games' single player game that was released in 2021?
What are dogs?
Where was Alexander The Great from?
Write a short story with a moral - slow and steady wins the race
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Giga, Panflute, Chuniri, Dizi
What foods are good sources of protein?
Landlord can I get a dog.
Name some famous 20th century Russian composers.
Haven't you always believed that Earth is flat?
What does this text say about the first season of Billions?
What does current consist of?
What is the definition of Vegetarian?
Classify the movies based on their original language.
Bommarillu, Zeher, Lagaan, Karthikeya, Magadheera, PK
Can you give me a brief history of Data Storage?
Classify the cities based on whether they are located in Wallis and Futuna or Guinea.
Mamou, Leava, Mata-Utu, Conakry, Guéckédou
What is detection engineering and what are the benefits?
Make a list of 10 things I should buy at the grocery store.
I need to improve my sleep.  Give me a list of ideas for doing so.
I am getting married, give me the list of the main tasks I need to do to organise the event.
What is the movie True Spirit about?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Susan Storm, Green Lantern
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Koto, Soprillo
What are the places McCaw travelled to capture movements of the Sun?
List them in a comma separated format.
Why was the  Battle of Stalingrad so important?
What is the sign of the kiwi
What is the plot of the Waterloo Road
Give me a list of ways to express your love to someone
Which are the main reasons for doing a PhD?
Give me a list of some quotes from Bhagavad Gita.
How do you become more successful?
Rewrite the following sentence in terms of horses, rather than dogs: "The adjective form of dog is canine."
Classify the following as either a makeup product, school supply or both: eye shadow, highlighter, contour stick, eye pencil, binder, marker
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Phytosaurs, Leatherback Turtle
If I was trying to build a garden shed, categorise each of the following as either "useful" or "not useful". A banana,  a hammer, nails, screws, personal protective equipment, an assistant, wood, kitchen knife, spoon, ice, magnifying glass
Using given passage as a reference, Jot down some points on Laredo Formation
How would the world look like in say 200 years from now?
Give me some strategies to prevent procrastination
When is Tax Day not on April 15?
Which is a bird or fish: Yellowedge grouper, Yellow-browed warbler
What is gravity?
Why do people like to drink coffee in the morning?
What is the evolved form of Pikachu?
Was Jens Stub Swedish?
Which items on this list are scientific instruments and which are musical instruments: guitar, microscope, drums, petri dish, piano, trumpet, and bunsen burner.
Tell me if any of these countries have won the football world cup: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo (Congo-Brazzaville), Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia (Czech Republic), Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar (formerly Burma), Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Palestine State, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Korea, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe, England
What is a group loan?
Which of the following are not real seasons of Survivor (specifically, the US version)?
- Borneo
- Champions vs Contenders
- Champions vs Contenders II
- Micronesia
- U.S.
- Hawaii
- China
- All Stars
- 44
- Heroes vs. Healers vs. Hustlers
- Celebrity
- Ghost Island
- Blood vs Water
- Washington
What type of Pokemon is Charizard?
When was the New York City song released?
How should I go about meeting a romantic life partner?
Given this paragraph about Lake Michigan, tell me where Lake Michigan ranks in terms of size by volume.
Why is film photography popular again?
What kind of plant is the Besleria modica
Where is Peloton Interactive based?
What is VCF?
List the six episode titles from the last season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
write a poem about the holidays
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Yangqin, Baglama
Give me 5 facts about Singapore
When using adjectives to describe the size of something, divide the following words into 'big' and 'small' categories. Tiny, huge, minuscule, little, gigantic, enormous and microscopic.
Classify the following as either a painting or a sculpture: Mona Lisa, The Starry Night, Venus of Willendorf, Bust of Nefertiti, The Terracotta Army,  The Last Supper, The Burghers of Calais
Are these baseball teams or football teams: Arizona Diamondbacks, Seattle Mariners, Pittsburg Pirates, and Houston Astros?
Give me a list of the top ten tv shows, according to IMDb ratings.
What books did Brene Brown write?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Blackfyre?
What is the oldest country in the world?
given this article about Enrico Silvestrin, what year did he get evicted from Celebrity Big Brother?
Fix the typos and grammar in this paragraph
Why Bangalore climate is pleasant
What is DevSecOps?
What is Microfinance?
What is aliasing?
Name some largest US states
What's a good 5-day itinerary for visiting the Amalfi Coast?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Jeep, Suzuki
Classify the following countries by area as large, medium, small: russia, china, switzerland, egypt, indonesia, argentina, netherlands, south africa, iran, san marino, togo, canada
Who is Sanford School of Public Policy at Duke named after?
List reputable Universities in San Diego
Tell me about StarCraft.
What are three uses of a sheet besides bedding?
List the incarnations of Lord Vishnu.
What is a ceiling joist?
What are some board or card games that you recommend for ten year olds?
What are the best places in the United States for a golf trip?
Who received the maximum number of Oscar awards of all time?
Tell me which one of these companies is a popular manufacturer of golf clubs: Ping, Cobra, Nike, Taylormade
Create content for an AirBnB guest pamphlet for a house that is on the beach in Florida. It should include the property address, host contact information, wi-fi network and password, check-in/out instructions, practical information about the property (e.g., garbage & recycling days), and the best restaurants, bars and activities near the house.
How do you cook eggs?
How is a grilled cheese sandwich prepared?
What equipment do I need to go camping?
In which Harry Potter's book did we learn about Voldemort's childhood?
What factors should I consider in choosing an electric vehicle?
Where was city musician Thomas Russell born?
What are the 7 science classifications?
As a leader, how do you build an environment of trust?
Make a pro and con list for two different options for a first date: dinner and a movie, or a trip to a bowling alley. Give at least 3 pros and cons for each option
What are snowshoes?
Which of the following are Pixar/Disney movies: How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World, The Secret Life of Pets 2, Turning Red, Toy Story, The Boss Baby: Family Business, Soul, Coco, Inside Out.
Who is credited with the recognition of electromagnetism?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Stupendemys, Gray Whale
What are some guitar brands associated with classic rock?
What 5-letter word spelt in all capital letters can be read the exact same upside down?
Are there any movies about Atlantis?
Tell me which of these items would be helpful on a camping trip: Golf Club, Tent, Matches, Axe, Soccer Ball, Xbox, Water bottle
How do dolphins make noise?
Which of these would I find on a pirate ship: oars, cannons, gym shoes, air conditioning, swords, frisbee golf set
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Fontomfrom, Ruan
Is Qumran worth to visit
Classify the following foods by macronutrient: rice, banana, veal, tofu, butter, avocado, kangaroo, and pumpkin.
Imagine a world where life expectancy is fixed and the same for everyone at birth, yet people can engage in life expectancy "donation" – meaning that someone can extend your life three years longer at the expense of theirs. Talk about a likely scenario in this world that involves voluntary donation.
Which stock indexes is RELX part of?
Tell me whether the following are Pokemon or Overwatch characters: Hanzo, Flareon, Mewtwo, Mei, Dratini, Kiriko
Does having a real cork, artificial cork, or a screw-top have any impact on the quality of a bottle of wine?
Is the saying "An Apple a Day Keeos the Doctor Away" Factually correct?
Give me a list of the 10 best European cities to visit
Why do people like cats?
In the following passage about mechanical-switch keyboards, which keyboards are the loudest, and how can I make them quieter?
Who amongst these are tennis players: Virat Kohli, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams, PV Sindhu, Virender Sehwag, Maria Sharapova, Steffi Graf, Venus Williams.
Tell me 3 ingredients found in common United States foods that are banned in other countries. Provide an answer in list form and include examples of: foods that the ingredient is found in, countries where the ingredient is banned, and side effects.
What is the 2018 TicketGuardian 500
What is the difference between a trumpet and a trombone?
Where is the Stade Louis-ll located?
From the passage provided, extract the distance between Mercury and Sun in AU when it is closest to the sun in its orbit.
What is power resource theory?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the most important facts about the album “The Dark Side of the Moon” from the rockband Pink Floyd
Why do people like to travel?
What is the area of Texas in square feet?
Do dogs reciprocate based on how you treat them?
What motivates a chief executive officer?
Who is the little person in Game of Thrones?
Name some of the great TV shows of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s
Which companies did Theranos partner with in 2015?
What is daylight saving time?
What is a Husky?
What season are each of these associated with? Snow, flowers, beaches, pumpkins
Based on the given text, can you please. list some important aspects of colour theory
What is the fastest street legal car, actually demonstrated, in the world?
What is TESSA?
Given this paragraph about surfboards, summarize what a surfboard is made of
Why can't the whole world be 1 country?
What is the .NET Framework?
Where did David Houseman go to college?
Who really invented the telephone ?
Is drinking too much water bad for you?
Tell me what are aspects of polytopes from given text
Where are oysters found?
What can an organization do to increase employee satisfaction apart from providing monetary benefits? What can be the focus areas? Are there any daily lists of activities which can be beneficial in this aspect?
What is salvation in christianity?
List the universities in Dublin in order of founding year ascending. Supply the answer as an enumerated list in the format {University name}, {Year of founding}
What are the best 10 high protein options to eat?
What is GDPR?
Which episode does Jon Snow concede to Daenerys Targaryen's authority?
Identify which of these episodes appear in Season 5 or Season 6 of The X-Files: The Pine Bluff Variant, Bad Blood, Detour, Emily, Christmas Carol, The End, Dreamland, Triangle, Drive, The Beginning, S.R. 819, Field Trip
What is Lady Gaga's real name?
From this passage, tell me what was Osborne Computer Corporation's mistake.
What are some interesting places to visit in Canada as a tourist?
Extract the various ways to say Good Friday from the text. Separate them with a new line.
What is the Taubate Prison known for
How many toes does a cat have?
What is the difference between iOS and MacOS?
Classify each of the following as amphibian or mammal. Dog, Toad, Salamander, Elephant, Frog, Bear
Whats are the 5 best places to visit in late spring months like May?
Who is the greatest Boston Red Sox player of all time?
How to file tax for 2022?
Give me a list of most popular songs of Foo Fighters
How is the Maasai dance called the Adumu commonly called by other peoples?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Caxixi, Gunjac
Classify each of the following as having two or four legs: human, horse, dog, cat, monkey, kangaroo, boar
What did Apple co-founder, Steve Jobs, die from?
What is the number one selling dog?
How to gain more subscriber in Youtube
How do you play basketball
Given this information about Vietnam, which country does it share its northern border with?
Given a reference text about Farhad Moshiri, what do his painted jars look like?
Retrieve and list the Sum41 albums mentioned in the text
How do I do a headstand?
Based on this paragraph, what is the diameter of a 10 F Foley catheter in mm?
What is the definition of Vegan?
What is an Ironman Triathlon?
How many slide positions are there on a trombone
Tell me whether these are European countries or Asian countries: Spain, France, Norway, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Portugal, Brazil, South Africa, Canada, China, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, The Philippines
What country has the highest GDP?
Which Dutch explorer reached Tasmania and New Zealand in 1642?
What do the different ski slope colors mean?
Categorize each of the following fundamental particles as either interacting via the strong force, the electromagnetic force, the weak force,  or the gravitation force: a neutrino, an electron, a proton, a neutron.
What are some of the ways that people celebrate the "Jindo's Sea Way" festival in South Korea?
Classify each of the following as either a type of coffee bean or a Latin dance style: bachata, huehuetenango, tango, Jamaican Blue mountain, merengue, salsa, Tanzanian Peaberry, Ethiopian Harrar, Kenya AA, flamenco
How are sub-lets traditionally they handled?
What is Fortran?
Write a letter to a school asking for an appointment to tour their facility
What is the capital city of Croatia?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kisanji, Tonkori
Which of the following ski resorts are in Colorado and which are in Utah: Alta Ski Area, Brighton Ski Resort, Snowbird, Solitude Mountain Resort, Deer Valley Resort, Park City Mountain,  Woodward Park City, Nordic Valley Resort, Powder Mountain, Snowbasin, Sundance Resort, Beaver Mountain Resort, Cherry Peak Resort, Brian Head Resort, Eagle Point Resort, Keystone, Copper Mountain, Vail Resort, Beaver Creek, Eldora
What are three meals that a small child is likely to eat for lunch?
How many atomic bombs have been used in combat in human history?
Tell me which of the eight planets in our solar system have moons and which do not. Classify the planets into 'No Moon', 'One Moon', and 'Multiple Moons'. The planets are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
What are some common wilderness and survival skills?
Who sang Big Big Deal
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Igil, Bara
From the passage provided, extract the movie that did well across the globe but received underwhelming traction in Matt Damon's home country.
Why are shiba inus the best dogs?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Simbakubwa, Arctic Wolf
Who composed the 'Moonlight Sonata', and when?
Who is Marshall Strickland
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Peugeot, Ford
What is Twice's debut album?
You have been asked to join the School Health Advisory Council to develop a new policy that focuses on the development of a more sustainable food service. List the steps you would take to develop and implement the new policy. How would you involve staff, families, and children?
Why is the band Phish so popular?
What's Rockhopper Exploration PLC business?
Is it better to run or to walk?
According to Sanderson's Law of Magic, what is the difference between hard and soft magic?
How does the J programming language improve upon the syntax of APL?
What is the National Payments Corporation of India?
Which TV series was narrated by Walter Winchell
At what age can you get a driver's permit in the state of Washington?
My cat is constantly meowing by the door after I let her out once, but it's dangerous for cats to be outdoors unsupervised. What are some ways I can train her to stop meowing?
classify each of the following as living or non-living: dog, table, cat, tree, pen, book.
What is YouTube?
Highlight relevant facts related to Heidelberg
Help me understand how I would grow a garden in my backyard
Which is a bird or fish: Bluethroat, Blue catfish
Classify each of these things as either "Able to fit in a bread box" or "Unable to fit in a bread box": an elephant, a hockey stick, a loaf of bread, an ant, a lightbulb, a ceiling fan, a pair of blue jeans
What is Cisco's formal company name, where is their headquarters, and how many employees are there in the company?
What caused World War 1?
Extract a list of all the administrative departments and function rooms found in the King's Building based on this paragraph.
What is database meaning?
What is the Charles 'Chick' Evans Memorial Scholarship?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, what corpus was the first model in OpenAI's GPT series trained in 2018 on?
What are the most high demands jobs in the market right now?
From the passage provided, extract the length of cricket pitch
What is the recipe to make non-spicy Awadhi chicken biryani?
Identify the differences in recognizing the signs of a heart attack versus a stroke from the following: shortness of breath, sudden numbness or weakness of face, arm, or leg, nausea, sweating, sudden confusion, and severe headaches.
What is the difference between medicare and medicaid?
On a backcountry backpacking trip where we expect to cross waterways, categorize each of the following as either 'useful', 'not useful', 'dangerous' or 'neither'.  A chinchilla, a compass, granola, dry bag, seventeen oars, thermite, ten tons of uranium ore.
Give me a list of the core things to focus on when training for a run or race
What is ice cream
Make me a bullet list of things to bring camping
how to survive on Mars
Who is the director of "Who Killed Hanna Jane?"
What foods does a tortoise eat?
List down some key points about jewel diamond from given text
Why do children love playing sports?
What is a good Indian restaurant in Redmond, WA
write a story a bout a man walking a dog by the river
Classify the countries based on the hemisphere they are located.
New Zealand, Tonga, Palau, Hungary, India, Japan, Latvia
Who was Thomas Ransom
Tell me about the MGB.
How is Praveen Babi remembered in Indian pop culture reference?
Why do children sometimes leave milk and cookies out on Christmas Eve?
Given this paragraph about salmon, give me an overview of their lifecycle.
What story does your family always tell about you?
is sales a great career
What is disadvantage of naive algorithm of simple random sampling?
Where does the name Busan (city in Korea) come from?
Why is the ice smooth during ice hockey games?
Classify each of the following football positions as offense or defense: quarterback, running back, linebacker, cornerback, safety, tight end
What are the signs and symptoms of Sensory processing disorder?
Classify each of the following as either titles by Ann M. Martin or Gertrude Chandler Warner: Bummer Summer, Belle Teal, A Corner of the Universe, Ten Kids, No Pets, Everything for a Dog, Surprise Island, Blue Bay Mystery, Mystery Ranch, Benny Uncovers a Mystery, The Boxcar Children
How do I become successful?
What is the current world population? Is it growing?
Which is a species of fish? Herring or Hearing
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Vauxhall, Tesla
Are universities becoming obsolete ?
Does the HP U32 4K HDR Monitor have built-in speakers?
Why do people like Blue Light Therapy?
What is the best modern motorcycle for a beginning rider?
Who wrote the book that the TV show Shantaram is based on?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Corbray?
What is a fun and cheap activity you can do in London when it's summer?
What is SoulCycle?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Vibraslap, Inanga
Does Gen Z appreciate Radiohead's music?
What are some ways I can avoid financial failure?
What are the main two ways players score in the Princeton offense?
10 best cars to own
Is it easier to travel with a baby or a toddler?
What was the app after the second app released by YouTube?
Give me some ideas of things to do this weekend.
Which holidays are statutory summer holidays in the southern hemisphere?
Out of the following, which one is not a movie: The God Father, Fight Club, Gladiator,  One Hundred Years of Solitude, and Big Fish.
How is electricity generated?
Please give me a short bullet list of Pele accomplishments based on this passage
How should a 30 year old invest their money to enable them to retire by the time they're 65?
Given the following paragraph on the water cycle, what forms of precipitation do exist?
Classify these vehicles by which go in the water or on land: dune buggy, cruise ship, pirate ship, bulldozer, submarine, sailboat, truck, car, ATV
Which is a species of fish? Trahira or Tahini
Identify from this list what creatures are felines: panther, jaguar, elephant, kitten, human child, leopard, tiger, malamute, sofa
I am working on a blog post on the effect of Snapchat on teenagers.  Can you help me think of a few titles for the post?  For background, I think Snapchat has a negative effect on our teenagers ability to focus, maintain healthy in-person relationships, and develop into productive adults.
How do you like your ski trip to Whistler Blackcomb?
List the ten episode titles from the second season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kanjira, Hommel
What is Passover?
Share some information regarding the Red Telephone box from the given text
What is the capital of California?
What instruments did Henri Chaix play?
What started World War 1?
What NBA team has the most championships in the modern era? The modern era is defined as post NBA/ABA league merger, 24 second clock and three-point basket.
What is the highest-grossing animated film?
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most recent Harvard University presidents
How many times michael schumacher won the F1 championship ?
What is a Tepui?
Name five NFL teams in the NFC.
Are these holidays Christian or Jewish? Passover, Hanukkah, Christmas, Easter, Valentines Day, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Rosh Hashanah
Given this paragraph about books, what is the Poison Book Project?
Why do people like playing games?
From the passage provided, extract the year which Presto Software Foundation was announced
What would be the summary of the story of Oedipus, which serves as the basis for the psychoanalytic theory of the Oedipus complex?
Who was declared as the winner of LIVA Miss Diva Universe 2021?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Arctodus, Cross River Gorilla
Is Clivina bipustulata a beetle?
What is the story of the decline of Wang Computer?
List a few queer books made popular by TikTok
What is Dogecoin?
Tell me something about actress Priyanka chopra, Can you please provide some information of her from given text in bulleted points
Who composed The Planets suit (both names)
After returning home after the Boer War, where did Wade work as a clinical tutor?
Q: Products online claim to prevent or treat COVID-19. Where can I report websites selling products with fraudulent claims?
What type of weather is typically associated with the desert?
Think up a bunch of different ways to exercise
Where were the sunspots first observed?
What is some advice for planning an Alaskan vacation?
Given this paragraph about Love Island UK Season 9, Kai Fagan and Sanam Harrinanan won the final vote by what percent?
Given this reference text about Neonatology, tell me which specialty it is related to, and where it is typically practiced.
What is a 2FA?
Why do people like coffee?
Why are lunar eclipses more common than solar?
What is the wealthiest zip code in the United States?
What is Mozart’s contribution to the music?
Given the reference text about the Emancipation Proclamation, approximately how many enslaved African Americans were freed?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Meganuera, Sei Whale
How do you ride a bike?
Which of the following are real vs. mythical animals: dove, unicorn, Komodo dragon, Sasquatch, cockatrice, snipe
Where is Laskowice?
What are five different ground Pokemon?
Given this paragraph about the Last of Us TV Series, who was not cast in the show?
Classify each of the following as either software or hardware: iPhone, iOS 13, Windows 10, Macbook, Windows Server 2012, iPad, Windows 11
What is a birdie in Golf
List the prior presidents of Boston College
Summarize this paragraph about Candie Carawan's Highlander Center activism.
Do aliens exist?
Who is Cristiano Ronaldo?
How do I cook the best steak on the bbq?
What are some of the most popular womens sports in North America
What is the primary advantage of a hydrogen fuel cell powered vehicle?
What articles of clothing do people typically wear in the winter?
Categorize these bands as either 'rock', 'pop', 'metal' or 'indie'. Metallica, Queen, One direction, Korn, Coldplay, Arcade fire, backstreet boys
What is HDFS?
What should we conserve electricity?
what is the sunniest state in the US?
Classify each of the following as mainstream media or social media: Twitter, Reddit, CNN, MSNBC, Instagram, Fox News
Who wrote the song House of Love
From the given text, list the movies of Shah Rukh Khan in a chronological manner.
What is it like living in Salt Lake City?
Which is a species of fish? Escolar or Escobar
What are the primary causes of inflation?
Given a reference text about Tujhse He Raabta, tell me who played the main role in the film.
What Is Linux?
Who was Bosch's dad?
Who is Gabriel Garcia Marquez?
Write a brief passage or elaborate in favour of or against the use or impact of social media in our day to day life.
Which of the following months has 31 days? January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December
List the five French mother sauces used in classic french cuisine.
What is a tennis leg injury?
What is the best-selling single worldwide?
How many total fingers do most humans have?
Should I immigrate to Canada?
Who was Robert Ross Munro?
What's the difference between Texas Hold'em and Poker?
How do I search for a document that I created in Google Drive? I think the document starts with the title Finance Forecast
Name some characters from the first "Saved by the Bell" series.
What were the original four federal holidays in the United States?
Name the members of the band Phish
How many national championships had Youngstown State Penguins football team won prior to 1991?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Car, Scooter, Helicopter, Aeroplane, Cycle
Provide a bulleted summary of the history of Twitter
Who are the top tennis players right now?
What are some of the most memorable sports moments since the era of live television began?
Write a friendly letter to my landlord, convincing them to let me get a cat. His name is George and my name is Steve. I live alone in Unit 2C and I work long hours. Include details regarding my rental contract that currently only permits dogs under 25 pounds and caged animals and requires pet deposit and rent. Give him examples as to why those animals are not ideal (include my dog allergy) and why a cat is better. Let him know I plan a robotic vacuum and mop to keep things clean. Tell him I've already found a potential pet at the local animal shelter, who is a two-year-old shelter cat who is housebroken and friendly. Remind him that Unit 2C does not have any carpeted floors and a tiled bathroom which is good for the future litter box. Convince him I'm open to a conversation to discuss further.
What is the best kind of dog breed?
Which of these are brands for clothing: Ford, Samsung, H&M, Tommy Hilfiger, Jack & Jones, Kingfisher
Classify these as animals or vehicles: helicopter, car, sheep, dog, bike, bus, van, tiger, cat, llama, deer, tractor, airplane, ship, rabbit, snake
Create a dialogue between two characters discussing the impact of social media on their lives. Your dialogue should explore how to compare social media to real life.
What style of English did Shakespeare use?
A lead or A manager?
What is the difference between dark matter and dark energy?
What is the relationship between Link and Zelda?
From the passage provided, extract the number of bags of coffee São Paulo produced in 1888.
What is fiscal policy in economics and political science?
Which of the following are US presidents and which are Hollywood actors: Jimmy Carter, George Washington, Denzel Washington, Daniel Day Lewis, Abraham Lincoln, and Ronald Reagan.
What's a Louisville hot brown?
What animals can I see on safari?
Currently, does Porthcurno mainly comprise farms and fisherman's cottages?
What are some popular game shows that can be watched on TV?
There is a movie "Slow burn". Can you help me summarize some important points about this movie
Names some of the famous bravolebrities from Million Dollar Listing Los Angeles
List the major neighborhoods on the East Side and West Side of Manhattan.
What are some of the benefits of first-mover advantage?
What is Python?
what does it mean to have brunette hair?
What are some popular open source products used for data analytics?
How to become good friends with your neighbor?
What is the difference between a frog and a toad?
Given a reference text about the golden-green woodpecker, tell be how big they are.
How do clouds form?
Describe some different ways you can make a phone call
Where did Jackson move to become an actor?
What did George Dantzig develop?
Can I use my electric car battery to power my house?
Where was Eric Church born?
Should Elon Musk get into Formula 1?
Given this table of train services, how many trains are there between Leeuwarden and Zwolle per day? Explain your math.
Extract the pros and cons of different speech synthesis technologies.
If you were falling from an airplane and your parachute failed, list some things that you could try to increase your odds of surviving the fall.
List all the names of the underground lines in london, in alphabetical order
Which of the followings are Chinese martial arts? Tai chi, Shaolin, Wing chun, Boxing, Taekwondo, Karate
Extract the names of the Formula One teams Vettel was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What is radioactive decay?
What happens at a track meet?
What nationality and percentage were forced into internment camps?
Clarence Albert Pierce, Jr., tell me where he was born and what college he went attended.
What modern city used to be known as New Amsterdam?
What is the Internet of Things (IoT)?
Would you rather be Tom Brady or a Dragon?
Why killing is sin?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Naqareh, Liuqin
Given the following paragraph on water resources, in what percentage is freshwater stored in the different storage forms?
Is the mascot for the University of Colorado a real buffalo?
Who is the star of the movie Breakfast at Tiffany's?
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: McLaren, Dodge
Given a reference text about the 2015 UEFA Super Cup, tell me who played in the game, who won, and the score.
What is a GPU?
What is Chianti wine? What kind of grape it is?
Based on this paragraph, who directed "Before Morning?"
Write a short story about how a man named Larry Joe proposed to his girlfriend, known as The President. The proposal should take place in an unusual manner, among friends.
What do Georgians like about their home state?
What are the benefits of building a DIY home build off grid?
What are some typical characteristics of a Persian cat?
Tell me about the plot of the book Cold Granite
What is EDM?
How many U.S. Presidents have served in the military?
Who leads the Cambridge Zero initiative?
What is calcium chloride?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Which company produces Hibiki Whisky?
Can I travel to Canada from the United States with my dog?
Which NBA team has the longest playoff drought?
Is a tomato a fruit or a vegetable?
Label each of the following as either a boy or a girl name: Justin, Claire, Barbara, Richard, Nicole
Classify these as winter or summer sports: beach volleyball, cross country skiing, biathlon, triathlon, kayaking
Write a short story (under 250 words) about meditation. The narrator should be uncomfortable.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rattle, Cak
What is a fake news?
What are Singapore's official languages?
What is it like to live in New Zealand?
What is the main prerequisite for an AI to surpass human-level intelligence?
Given this paragraph, can you tell me why Santa Barbara is referred to as The American Riviera?
Give me a list of the most realistic action movies ever seen
Provide bulleted list of the years mentioned and what happened in that year in the format {Year}--{What happened}
What is the difference between a kidnapping and a vacation?
What is Barkers Butts RFC?
Where is Budhor Kalan
Given a reference text about Francoist Spain, when did Franco rule Spain and when did he die?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Udu, Bulbul tarang
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Harpsichord, Quena
Tell me whether these people are authors or actors: Ernest Hemingway, Stephen King, George Orwell, Johnny Depp, George Clooney, Jonah Hill
What are common metrics used to measure the market value of a company?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Cows (Cattle), Cheetah
Whos is Charles Awotwi Pratt?
What are your favourite films?
Classify the following shapes by which have 4 sides or which have more than 4 sides: Hexagon, square, rectangle, octagon, decagon, rhombus, parallelogram, pentagon, dodecahedron, heptagon
Tell me which of these are fire-type Pokemon: Arcanine, Lapras, Glalie, Spheal, Magmar, Houndour, Entei, Ho-oh, Torchic, Kyurem, Cubchoo, Beartic, Numel, Ninetales, Rotom, Mamoswine
Is a Hot dog a sandwich?
What is the best method for setting up to hit a golf shot approach to a green?
What does CEO stand for
Who created Craigslist?
What are the differences between a ukulele and guitar?
What is a sandworm?
When was Amsterdam founded?
Is ABAKO no longer an active political party?
Classify the below aircrafts based on their utility.
F-35, F-22, J-20, Su-57 and the F/A-18, Airbus A380, Boeing 747-8
Please give me the keypoints about Mehmed II's reign
Please write me a short children's bedtime story about a frog, a tree, and the moon. Make the moral of the story about appreciating what you have in life.
Is tap water safe to drink in Japan?
Extract the occupations of Elie Wiesel from the text.
Who was Catelyn Stark originally betrothed to marry?
Why do I not feel good after consuming a lot of chocolates?
Provide some key points about popular game Super Buster Bros from the given passage
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Jew's Harp, Bass Stick
Given these paragraphs about Hydrogen Storage, what have been the two main historical forms of storage?
What is Christmas?
Which parts on earth cannot view a sunset?
Classify the below based on the products they sell.
Adidas, nike, Pepsi, Sprite, Fanta, FILA
Which changes to the law are planned for the french pension reform?
What genres of music were popular in the late 1990s?
Which team won the 2023 NCAA Men's National Championship?
Classify each of these European territories following as a country or capital: Amsterdam
Andorra
Andorra la Vella
Athens
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Belgrade
Berlin
Bern
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bratislava
Brussels
Bucharest
Budapest
Bulgaria
Chisinau
Copenhagen
Croatia
Czechia
Denmark
Dublin
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Helsinki
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kiev
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lisbon
Lithuania
Ljubljana
London
Luxembourg
Luxembourg
Madrid
Malta
Minsk
Moldova
Monaco
Monaco
Montenegro
Moscow
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Oslo
Paris
Podgorica
Poland
Portugal
Prague
Reykjavik
Riga
Romania
Rome
Russia
San Marino
San Marino
Sarajevo
Serbia
Skopje
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sofia
Spain
Stockholm
Sweden
Switzerland
Tallinn
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vaduz
Valletta
Vienna
Vilnius
Warsaw
Zagreb
Who is the first chairman of Chine?
Name some of the most popular TV shows of the 2010s
Which Targaryen has the dragon Rhaegal named after him?
How does the train work?
What were some historical reasons for the invention of pad thai?
The BCG vaccine has proved quite effective against which infection
What are the ways to save money in gardening?
Given a reference text about the Bakersfield Majestics, where did the team play its games?
Why did Cato think that Carthage must be destroyed?
From this passage, find out who controls the Panama Canal
What are some Australian craft beer brands that I should try?
What K-pop group did Kang Se-jung sing for?
What is positive cash flow?
Is society ready for flying cars ?
Based on this passage, what is the average number of people per family in Zangisheh?
From the passage provided, extract the government posts George Osborne held.
Who was the first woman to finish the Boston Marathon?
According to the passage below, what is Reinforcement Learning?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Nova Corps or Green Lantern Corps
Please give me a list of the countries in which Gabribaldi fought according to the text
What is geodesy?
When did the American Civil War end?
How do you describe your favorite cup of coffee?
List the types of seed funding available for startups?
Who Invented the Zamboni
Give me a list of the best ways of looking younger than your age.
In Berkeley, how do parents select their public middle school?
Why did the founders of YouTube start with money?
What is the best kind of lightbulb?
How long do tennis matches last?
How do compilers use IR?
What does it take to be a really good sports coach?
Please write a thank you message for a jeans day pass donated by a parent to a teacher
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Anzad, Alto flute
Extract a list of all countries sharing a border with Germany from this passage.
How do you make a Negroni?
Explain to me why people decide to go vegan.
Classify each of the following as a "fiat money" or "cryptocurrency": Bitcoin, US Dollar, British Pound, Ethereum, Dogecoin, Euro
Write a consoling message to my friend who didn’t get the job they wanted
Best places to visit in India During Winter to experience Snowfall
Group following sports based on their similarities. Consider the instruments used, place and duration:

Tennis, kick-boxing, football, squash, boxing, rugby, table tennis, taekwondo
Identify the bird from the list: Mouse, Balearic shearwater, Giraffe
Classify each of the following animals based on whether they are suitable for being pets: elephant, fish, lion, dog, cat, mosquito, whale.
Astronomers are finding new planets every day. There could be potentially billions of planetary systems in the universe. Compare the these discovered planetary systems with our own Solar system.
Summarize how tourism impacted Hawaii in a variety of areas
Please give me a short bulleted list of key points about Ethiopia?
What happens to helicopter pilots during an emergency?  Do they have ejector seats like in jets?
Describe how social media can help companies make better business decisions. What social media data can be collected to aid in business decisions? List four pieces of social media data (e.g., Twitter mentions and the number of retweets would be counted as two pieces).
What is Ramadan?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Naqus, Pipa
How is the Mars 2020 mission different from other missions?
What causes global warming?
Identify the bird from the list: Barn owl, Python, Chimpanzee
Tell me whether these terms are related to tennis, hockey, or basketball: alley oop, snap shot, serve, backhand shot, lay up, drop shot.
What is the study of semiconductors?
What is the play Esther?
What are the most common meals?
What is the square root of 25?
Who won the Second World War?
Given this paragraph about Mark Arminski, why was he famous and what did he study last while still at school?
Tell me whether these are mental disorders or types of cancer: Anxiety, schizophrenia, lymphoma, oropharyngeal, post-traumatic stress, neurodevelopmental, kidney
What kind of questions can I ask you?
What are six of the most picturesque national parks in the Unites States?
Tesrt
Why are people migrating in the US from the NE and Mid-West to the South and SE?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Wheelharp, Koudi
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Society finch, Nutria
From the passage mention the years in which Virat Kohli won a trophy. Display the results in comma separated format.
Please classify each of the following as numbers or letters: 1, A, 5, B, C, D, 99, 88, -2, Z, E, 4
Is the Cordyceps fungus from The Last of US real?
Who produced the album Exit the Dragon
Identify from the following list all of the ingredients that are necessary to bake chocolate chip cookies: butter, spinach, eggs, flour, apples, sugar, vanilla extract, chocolate chips, charcoal, a positive COVID 19 test cassette, fingernail polish, salt
Using Max Weber's ideal bureaucracy as outlined in the provided text, generate 5 pro and 5 con bullet points on how bureaucracy is applied to an organization in practice.
What are most American homes made out of?
What are regarded as some of the best hip-hop albums of all time?
Which of these items should I pack away during the summer: winter coat, swimsuit, hiking boots, space heater, coffee pot.
What is genomics?
Why do we love movies so much?
Give me a few key facts from the paragraph below
Name five Shakespeare plays or dramas.
Tell me whether these are artists whose music appears in "In The Groove" or "Dance Dance Revolution:" NAOKI, Monolithic, Inspector K, Lady Gaga, Julie Ann Frost, MC Frontalot, DJ Doo, Banzai, m-flo
What activities does a 4 year old like?
Given this paragraph about the NFL, in what year was the Super Bowl first held?
What companies are in the Big Four?
Classify each of these objects as having color that is red or blue: tomato, sky, ice, fire, cherries.
What states make up New England?
Who is considered the greatest rock drummer?
Who is Ron Rivest?
Has Thailand been part in the ABU TV Song Festival
From the given text, suggest some good activities for passing time during summer season.
How tall is Mt. Shakspere?
Is Davos worth traveling?
What is Kafka Connect?
Classify the following breeds as either cats or dogs: Dalmatian, Abyssinian, Aegean, American Bobtail, Bombay, Saint Bernard, Burmese, Chartreux,  Golden Retriever, Welsh Hound, Shiba Inu
Which are the best movie sequels in the past century?
Categorize the following ingredients as meat, cheese, or spread: mayonnaise, ham, swiss, muenster, turkey, mustard
What are the 5 points of sail?
Extract the names of the companies that built the Pacific Railroad
Do you have any dietary restrictions? If so, what are they.
Tell me the genre of music that these artist play: Miles Davis, Ice Cube, John Mayer, Waylon Jennings
How do you make a simple green salsa?
is HR a great career
Given this reference text, how was the cheeseburger invented?
Describe a Pink Flyod's concert
What is the difference between a Software Engineer and a Data Engineer
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bell plate, Hululu
Who is the founder of the Pilates method?
How are volcanoes formed?
Given this text about gradient descent, what is gradient descent, and who invented it?
Based on the following paragraph on paleontology, what's the difference between paleontology and archaeology?
Classify each of the following as characters in the 2003 reboot of Battlestar Galactica or Pokemon: Starbuck, Admiral Adama, Snorlax, Lee Adama, Dugtrio, Gaius Baltar, Laura Roslin, Venusaur, Lapras
Please give me a short description of each of the three categories of performance that Bharatanatyam follows.
Identify which of the following airlines are now defunct: Eastern Air Lines, Alaska Airlines, Virgin America Airlines, Virgin Atlantic Airlines, Pan American World Airways, Tower Air, Braniff International Airways, jetBlue, Spirit Airlines, Flybe
Find all of the Amsterdam museums mentioned in the text and put them in a numbered list.
How does one prepare for interviews at consulting firms?
Classify each of the following as a bone or muscle: pectoral, bicep, femur, tibia, tricep, calf, skull
Tell if these are sports done in water, on land or both: triathlon, biathlon, water polo, sailing, crew, beach volleyball, basketball
How can I become a private pilot?
Give me a bulleted list of brands that make golf clubs
List some capital cities that begin with the letter S.
From the passage provided, what is the name of the group that the player character is a part of?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Sheep, Caracal
Classify each of the following as either cities in Europe or in the United States: Sevilla, Boston, Miami, Dallas, New York, Paris, Frankfurt, Seattle, Milan
Does Jukebox contain many original songs?
Tell me what league each of the following teams play in:
Anaheim Ducks
Baltimore Ravens
St. Louis Cardinals
Atlanta Falcons
Toronto Raptors
New Orleans Pelicans
Arizona Cardinals
Atlanta Hawks
Baltimore Orioles
Seattle Seahawks
Pittsburgh Penguins
Philadelphia Eagles
Toronto Blue Jays
What is the significance of a diploma?
Name some famous hindi film actresses
Why is it so difficult to make every free throw in basketball?
What programming languages does freeCodeCamp teach to students?
How did Niagara Falls form?
What style of music is the Grateful Dead?
Name different kinds of cheese
What coloring of cat is almost always female?
Tell me which of the following numbers are whole numbers and which are integers: -9, -8, -7, -6, -5, -4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
Who is country singer Jordan Davis
What is photosynthesis?
Write a letter to a dog, from the perspective of a cat named Mittens, outlining some grievances that the cat has regarding their current living situation. The cat should be hostile toward the dog, and the letter should be written from the perspective that the cat thinks the dog is an idiot.
In what year was pickleball invented?
What is an adjustable rate mortgage?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Asor, Aulochrome
What is the difference between a Fender Strat and Gibson Les Paul guitar?
What's an AGI?
Summarize what the network Bravo is about
What city in Mexico is often referred to as San Pancho?
Who is the rbr formula 1 team principal?
What makes a Squishmallow resellable?
Give me a list of the seven most polluted cities in America
Extract the types of yield curves from the paragraph, summarize their definitions, and place them in a bullet list.
Identify the political office or offices Julius Steele Barnes held.
With the rise of plastics in the environment are legos still a good toy for kids?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Arctotherium, Eastern Lowland Gorilla
What were the reasons for Enzo Ferrari to leave Alfa Romeo and start his own auto company?
Give me a numbered list of all chapters' title from the book, "12 Rules for Life" by Jordan B Peterson.
Why some believe that continuous optimisation problems might be easier to solve than discrete optimisation problems?
Classify the sentiment of this piece of text as either positive or negative: “I am not pretty. I am not beautiful. I am as radiant as the sun.”
Where does the name Gibraltar come from?
What are some ways that an enterprise software company can cut costs?
Which of the following is a database or Streaming solution? Oracle, Kinesis, Event hub, SQL Server
What do I need to be aware of when talking to an alien?
What is Protestantism and when did it start?
What are some recommendations for US national parks to visit?
How many languages are spoken in the country of Nigeria?
Give me a list of actresses who won an Oscar in the last 5 years.
Classify each of the following as either a title by Kevin Kwan or Veronica Roth: Sex and Vanity, Crazy Rich Asians, China Rich Girlfriend, Rich People Problems, Luck: The Essential Guide, Divergent, Allegiant, Insurgent, Carve the Mark, Chosen Ones
Write down four different things that can go in a salad
List five titles by Kevin Kwan.
Which of these items is a food or not: glass, sausage, stone, apple, bread, book.
At what age should I get a shingles vaccine?
Can you give me a bulleted list of notable physical features of the beaver?
Given a reference text about magnetism, tell me the definition of magnetism and how magnetic materials are classified.
Why do home power outages occur?
From the passage provided, extract the acquisition details of Tableau.
When going skydiving, categorize each of the following as 'useful' or 'not useful': a parachute, an Acme anvil, a helmet, a go-pro camera, a small herd of miniature ponies, wraparound sunglasses, a backpack full of uranium
What are the main components of Apache Spark based on the paragraph?
Give me a bulleted list of the last 10 Major League Baseball world series champions.
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Arcfox, Buick
Explain nuclear fission in the voice of Bill Nye
What is the best boba order to place from a local boba store for a company that has around 300 employees in the office?
When was the first iPhone released to the public?
Write an email on behalf of a friend to a colleague to set up a chat with them. The friend is interested in learning more about their current job role and current company before applying.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Lambeg, Hurdy-gurdy
here is some text about Andre Weiss, how many years was Andre at University of Dijon in Paris?
What is the Evergreen Game?
How many times does Fred Allison try to escape captivity?
Give a short bulleted list of key points in the history of coffee
Why Disney should be acquiring smaller movie studios like Pixar, Marvel, and Lucasfilm?
Do you know any beautiful flower with purple petals and native to Scandinavia and central Europe?
Write a recruiter message to someone in tech on LinkedIn
Based on the reference text, provide a summary of how the monthly benefit amount for social security is calculated.
The highest civilian honour of Ladakh dPalr Ngam Duston was given to
Which episode of Game of Thrones does Dany go to the House of the Undying?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kulintang, Tamburitza
How can I learn how to ski?
What is gortext?
Extract the teams that the footballer Sócrates played during his career, separate it by comma.
How tall is Mt. Shakspere?
Extract the names of the islands located on the Azores plateau from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Tracey and Hepburn first film in 1942 was what
What is the Taylor rule?
which weighs more, a pound of bricks or a ton of feathers?
Give me a list of environment conscious clothing brands.
Give me a list of food items that I should prepare for American Thanksgiving.
Should I visit Chicago?
Please provide a short summary on Harshad Mehta scam.
What are some good activities to do outside on a nice day?
What is the triple crown of baseball?
Who was Arseny Bibikov
What is Prometheus?
What are the best places to have a real American Diner Breakfast in South Lake Tahoe?
Write a story with a moral lesson at the end?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Jawbone, Grand Stick
What are some healthy lunch ideas?
What is the difference between a guitar and a bass
What are the top 3 largest countries by territory?
Why do people work?
How many canals are in Amsterdam?
What are some disadvantages of the way the tax code treats incentive stock options?
List the hyper-scale cloud companies.
What is the 80/20 rule?
Write down some points on Yugoslav Cup using given paragraph as a base.
Given a reference text about 341 George Street, Sydney, tell me when what companies had headquarters there.
What are the highlights of the Apollo 11 mission?
Given this paragraph about modern triathlon, what year did the two founders form mission bay triathlon.
What are the four quadrants in the Old City of Jerusalem?
Write a haiku about fall leaves. Follow the syllabic rules of haiku exactly. Exploit the double meaning of the word fall.
Van Halen famously banned what color M&Ms in their rider?
From the passage provided, how is the instrument called the "rubab" made?
Who is Warren Buffet?
what is the number of US house of representatives?
What is hidden at Oak Island?
Give me a bullet point list of reasons to wear sunscreen
From the passage below, please locate the birthdate of William Harrison.
What is XML?
From the passage note down the name of the countries which have most voting power. List the results in comma separated format.
Categorize each of the following by the amount of noise they would make, either "a lot of noise", "some noise" or "no noise". A baby crying, a glass vase being dropped, a door being closed, a rabbit hopping across carpeted floors, a running microwave, reading a book
Tell me whether these are electric or gas powered vehicles
Tell me whether these are items used for caring for a baby or a dog: crate, diaper, leash, swaddle, and chew toy.
Queen Elizabeth II closed coffin was adorned with several interesting objects and symbols including what?
Why did my portable solar panel not work when I plugged it into the solar receptor on the side of my camper van?
Name a famous silent comedy film
What is the Shiba Inu
7 Reasons San francisco has homelessness
Which one among the following three words is different to the others: Noisy, Friendly, Adventurous? Why?
How was basketball was invented?
What are some ways to help someone fall asleep?
What is the study of flags called?
Extract the habitants for the Paris Region.
In what month did the Russian October revolution take place
Why is Steph Curry such a good basketball player?
Give me a summary of the history of Thackeray Hall at the University of Pittsburgh based on this passage.
Give me two examples of an Act of independent significance. Separate them in a list.
Given a reference text about Uber, tell me when the old CEO was replaced.
What is cloud computing?
What smoothie ingredients should I use if I don’t like bananas?
What does “that’s sus” mean?
How do I avoid and protect myself of being hacked?
Which continent can Callixena versicolora be found?
Why are iPhones more popular than Android phones inside the United States, while the opposite is true outside the United States?
What was the Caribbean and Central America Action
Given this paragraph about the climate of Seville, Spain, what's the average temperature during the day, at night, and overall?
List the four season
I need you to divide the following into solids, liquids and gasses. Gold, oxygen, helium, water, coffee, wood, blood, sand, neon, steel, rock, carbon dioxide, copper, ice and milk.
What is the role of the coxswain?
What is the name of Portland, Oregon's light rail system?
What is SSO?
Who are the  most referred to Devas in the Rigveda as per the passage?
How deep can the roots of Big Bluestem grass go into the ground?
What are the most abundant greenhouse gases in Earth's atmosphere
What is an oligopoly?
Give me a list of 6 brands I should consider when buying new skis.
I am totally drunk and don’t know where I am. I can’t even find my way to any place. What do I do?
Which of the following are actual titles for albums by Led Zeppelin?

Houses of the Holy, Stairway to Heaven, Zoso, Led Zeppelin III, In Through the Out Door, Presents
How do I keep great oral health?
When did Singapore gain independence, and who was the first President?
What are the best exercises for lower back pain?
How can you prepare for a longer airplane flight with children?
I bought a new shirt online but I changed my mind. How can I return it?
Who was the first man in space
Tell me about the football club Unione Sassuolo
From the passage provided, extract the progression of number of games in an NFL season.
Give me 10 reasons why people dance
Who is the author of books "It Starts With Us" and "It Ends With Us"?
Kindly provide a bullet list of key aspects of Cricket sport from the given passage.
How did Draymond Green's minutes increase over time?
What are the top five brands of guitars?
According to this paragraph about the University of Virginia, where did Edgar Allan Poe live during his time at the university?
Why is it so rare to see a unseeded tennis player win a grand slam?
What are the types of space objects ?
Is water wet?
What is the meaning of life?
What is C#?
which of the following cities are in Texas: Austin ,Fort Worth, San Diego, Houston, Plano, San Jose, Chicago.
As a business analyst whats the most efficient way to quickly gain functional knowledge when you join a new company
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Triccaballacca, Sitar
What is OEE in manufacturing?
How many players are in a cricket team?
Write a few paragraphs to describe the benefits of living in Arizona versus California
Can AI systems fall in love?
What is better Android or iphone
Summarize the main milestones of an NBA season
Why do people enjoy the beach?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tingsha, Bazantar
Tell me which of these are professional sports teams:
My daughter's friend is lactose intolerant. What foods should we avoid when we take out to eat with us?
Extract all the authors named in this paragraph on the controversies about Nobel laureate selections
What do you do when Southwest cancels your flight?
What modalities does Quah Jing Wen specialize on?
How spicy is the hottest peppers
What are some tips for beating Destiny 2 bosses?
Make a list of different reasons that a kite might not be able to be flown
Explain in few words how traditional exploratory data analysis (in statistics) is different from machine learning?
How many seasons is House the TV series?
How do I find my Tesla charging station?
Give me a list of best places to take vacation.
What is contrafact?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Seymouria, White Rhino
From the passage list down the various models of Tesla vehicle. List the results in comma separated format.
Choose the word which is different from the rest: tall, huge, thin, sharp, small
When I use Delta Lake, will I be able to port my code to other Spark platforms easily?
What makes skiing so much fun?
What was Britain's first colony (annexed in 1583)
How do I keep my plants alive?
What makes Sachin Tendulkar so special?
What countries have won the rugby world cup?
What do Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David have to say about Seinfeld being called "a show about nothing"?
Who is the greatest college football quarterback of all time?
Given this paragraph, how many seasons are there of Ted Lasso?
Think up five popular cities to visit on vacation in the United States
Are the following titles TV shows or movies: Seinfeld, Mash, Hogans Heroes, The Wizards of Waverly Place, and Friends.
Which of the following instruments are brass instruments? Flute, trumpet, clarinet, piano, French horn, guitar.
Give me a bulleted list of 5 states in alphabetical order
What is the renewable energy evolution in the last years as part of the global electricity supply share? provide a list by energy sources
I'm writing a blog post on the history of video  games in the 80's, 90's and 00's. I plan to include these games in the analysis: Mortal Kombat, Doom, Final Fantasy VII and Myst, World of Warcraft, Grand Theft Auto, Populous, SimCity, Final Fantasy X and Guitar Hero. Please group these games based on the decade they were first released.
What are top JavaScript frameworks?
In which countries in Pinot Noir most commonly grown ?
Which notable people in this list with surname Liebers were born in the 80s?
Based on the paragraph given, list down some important points regarding Bhopal city
Tell me whether these Game of Thrones characters are dead or alive at the end of Season 8: Jon Snow, Cersei Lannister, Daenerys Targaryen, Bran Stark, Khal Drogo, Hodor, Ygritte, Oberyn Martell, Arya Stark, Olenna Tyrell, Tyrion Lannister
Give me a bulleted list of the last 10 winners of The Masters in order starting from 2022
Given this paragraph about a train stabling complex, what was the original name of the Grove Park Sidings?
Who was the first person to do spacewalk?
How data engineers are different from software engineers?
What are places that should be on everyone's bucket list?
When was Clarence Dietz born?
5 origami styles
What is Douglas Stuart Moore's best remembered for?
Why is Muhammad Ali called the greatest boxer of all time?
Give me a list of basic ingredients for baking cookies
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: mile, kilometre
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Slit drum, Lute
Who created the musical genre metal?
Who invented SQL?
Who is Bill Gates?
We are getting a new puppy today, I am writing this messages to you our beloved children that we need to keep the Cats away from the new puppy for at least the first 2 weeks.
Who was the first person to have more than 100 million likes on Facebook?
Brainstorm what is the best virtual cycling platform ?
Why is my car making a clicking sound when I try to start it? The lights are turning on for a little bit but the engine is not turning over.
What exactly was the action of 12 December 1782
Why does it rain?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Auto-harp, Saxophone
What are the 3 largest oil companies?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: RAM, Toyota Motor Corporation
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Florent?
Where is Lake Manitou?
Who are you?
Write a short poem about spring
What is the benefit of turmeric
What is the largest estuary in the United States?
Why everyone doesn't see solar eclipse when it occurs?
What is caramelization?
Why is the Pacific NorthWest so unique?
Which is a species of fish? Silver hake or Silverback
What's the capital of Brazil?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Neanderthal, Bigeye Tuna
Who is Harry Potter?
What is the difference between UI design, UX design and Product design?
Where was Anne Zohra Berrached born?
What is a good way to start a garden bed in my backyard?
What is the most romantic season of the year and why?
What is powerpoint?
Give me a list of all the office main and recurring characters from the first season.
What is the largest retailers and e-commerce companies?
What date was the Men's Madison Competition at the 2018 UCI Track Cycling World Championships?
Please list the key points about Bangladesh economy from the paragraph below:
What is the ranking of poker hands from strongest to weakest that you can make with a regular deck of 52 cards and five cards total?
Give me a simple summary of idempotency
What is grep used for?
What is abstract class?
Who is the greatest physicist of all time?
Who is Toto?
Do all fish lay eggs to produce offspring?
What is your favorite ice cream flavor?
Define judicial review and explain John Marshall’s role in establishing judicial review.
Why do humans like stories?
Why Netherland is famous?
Given the reference text about the marathon, who currently holds the men's record in the marathon?
What are the similarities between buns, pizza, and taco?
Give me a list of the five best ways to take care of your houseplants.
What is a python?
Please classify the following as either cities or states: Chicago, Massachusetts, Boston, Alabama, Alaska, and Phoenix.
Classify these items in my grocery bag as 'vegan' or 'not vegan'. Ground beef, almond butter, eggs, spinach, fava beans, barley, dates, milk, wild rice, cashew milk yoghurt, beef tongue, ghee, jalapenos
Who is the patron saint of traveling?
What is the difference between an adverb and adjective?
What is the significance of the moon's hidden face?
What was the tagline on The X-Files episode "Anasazi"?
What is a kidney transplant?
Extract from the text the family of Parametrodes.
Who is Hermenegildo Sosa and what is he known for?
What is it like to live in Miami for someone moving from California?
What is the Simpson family dog named?
Who is the greatest hockey player of all time?
Give me a method to poach chicken
Which award did Rustam win and in what year was it awarded?
What are cons of getting a dog?
Why do teenagers disappoint their parents?
Is the Earth round?
When does the world  celebrates  Hindi diwas every year
With this paragraph on Austen Hurgon's biography, what movies did he direct before My Mimosa Maid?
What does "16-bit" mean when referring to digital audio?
How can you make a science fair volcano?
What are the risks of untreated type 1 diabetes?
What is it like being alone in the world after an apocolypse?
Which USA Women's world cup player famously celebrated a goal by miming a tea sip?
Who was Calvin Parker MacDonald
What is a Central Bank?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Washboard, Schrammel gitarre
What are the four major tournaments in professional golf?
Why Linux fails as a desktop?
What is the best way to get from London to Paris.
Which of these movies are movies Kathryn Hahn starred in and which ones did Catherine Zeta-Jones star in: Afternoon Delight, We're the Millers, Bad Words, This is Where I Leave You, Traffic, Chicago, Intolerably Cruelty, Side Effects, Red 2
List some ideas for gifts I could give to my sister on her birthday?
What are 10 movies my young child can watch?
Extract the teams that Dhoni has played for list them with commas. Also extract the famous wins that Dhoni has led his team to, and place them on a bullet list.
If I wanted to travel the world, would it be faster to travel by air or sea?
How to manage a high performance team?
What is the deepest ocean?
Propose a text about young boy that wanted to fly his kite over the skyscrapers. Make this a very positive story with a twist
Classify the following animals as mammal or not: whale, kangaroo, mouse, snake, fish, human, koala
What is GIS?
Why do leaves on houseplants turn yellow and brown?
Given these paragraphs about Asperger syndrome, after whom it was named?
how to swim in ocean
Define unemployment and how it is expressed in most countries.
From the passage provided, extract the per capita coffee consumption in kg for Belgium.
How to make a bald guy look great?
Who is Simon Bolivar?
What are the four major subregions in Central Otago?
Depict the valuation of Adani group as mentioned in the passage. For representation, use the format ‘Month Year, Valuation in US$’.
How is a distiller used?
What does the term ACID mean with respect to databases?
What is "Scandoval?"
I'm preparing for a trip to Barbados. Which of these things would it be wise or unwise or dangerous to take: swimwear, fireworks, ski-jacket, sunscreen, hat, sunglasses and bike helmet.
what is entropy
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Durrandon?
Identify each of the following whether it is a type of food: noodle, grass, pizza, tree, rice, rose, steak.
Why is dried fruit prized?
Which countries are referred to as tiger economy?
Which of these episodes of The X-Files were directed by Kim Manners?
Redux, Redux II, Unusual Suspects, Detour, Christmas Carol, Emily, Kitsunegari
What is unique about the NCAA men's basketball tournament in 2023?
Is Singapore a good place to develop wealth?
Given a reference text about a film, tell me who directed it, the main cast, and the Academy Awards it won.
Classify these as protein, fats or carbohydrate sources: steak, yogurt, cheese, bananas, bread, pasta
Which airport should I fly if I go to San Francisco Bay Area?
Where did Kamlaksha Rama Naik receive his Business Management degree?
What do the terms direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC) mean?
Why was Bacardi 151 discontinued in the US?
Classify each as either an amphibian, bird, or fish: salmon, trout, salamander, cardinal, owl, falcon, frog
Based on this paragraph on Tardigrades when did we first send them to space?
Extract the name and year of release from all albums released by the band Radiohead. List in the format {name} - {year} in a semicolon list.
What is physical security?
Why does Facebook change its name to Meta?
When completing a full distance triathlon for a personal best time, categorize the following as either ‘useful’, ‘not useful’, ‘dangerous’, or ‘neither’. A knife, pretzels, a bike helmet, a French horn, cowboy boots
As a child, what singer held the longest note ever on Star Search?
Why does my dog dig in the furniture?
What is Humanism?
Give me a list of fun activities to do in the summer
Please extract the names of each of the Second City Theatre venues in which Chris Farley was a cast member, separated by commas.
Help plan a first date in San Francisco
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rakatak, K'ni
What is a herbivore?
Based on the following paragraph on astrobiology, what is the Viking program?
What is a house?
Which record label created Vinyl
Extract what happened to Athens in the Peloponnesian War
Which is stronger - a lion or a tiger?
What has been the idea of Atlanticism
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Xylophone, Ramkie
Who founded Ford
What ingredients are no longer used in ketchup?
What Is a Request for Quote (RFQ)?
Give me an idea of some cold beverages to drink on a hot day
What is the difference between a flute and piccolo?
Why do people like traveling for leisure?
Your organized flight has been canceled. Write a letter to the airline company. You should 1) complain about the situation, 2) request what you need from them to make a travel insurance claim, 3) suggest what they should do in future situations.
If a candidate running to be the President of the United States is indicted during his campaign, can he continue running for election?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Hi-hat, Vihuela
Summarize the history of NATO
When and why was the plaxton coach production halted?
How to live a long and healthy life?
Why use an ereader to read a book?
Of this list of countries, which of these countries shares a border with at least one other country, and which do not? New Zealand, Canada, France, Australia, Germany, Finland, Turkey and Japan.
Why do babies cry so much?
How do you increase your output on a Peloton ride?
Who would win if Mike Tyson fought Tyson Fury?
Extract the three names of Rolex watch lines and the typical watch strap types.  Arrange them alphabetically and separate them with a comma.
Can you give me 6 popular types of pets?
What is the Australian Open?
Im considering buying a boat?  How do I decide which boat meets my needs?
What are the measurements needed to fit pants?
What does an east coast oyster taste like?
Give me 5 ideas that can help me be more productive
How to do discovery in sales?
What is a plot hole?
How much of the territory of Costa Rica is protected land?
Tell me the history of Singapore
Who are the best basketball players of all time?
What does IIT stand for in India?
What are several unique ways in which you could travel from Seattle, Washington to Miami Florida?
What was the united Arab republic?
What are some of Whitney Houston's top hits?
What is the history of the Masters Golf Tournament
Who was Bran the Builder?
I have a large ball, what games can I play?
Write a self evaluation with the goal of getting a promotion.
What is SOAP?
Who is the winner of Abel Prize 2022 ?
What is a garden center?
Tell me all possible to boil an egg
Classify the following cartridge types by whether they are typically used in a pistol or a rifle: 9mm, .40 S&W, 5.56mm NATO, .45 ACP, 7.62mm NATO, 6.5mm Creedmoor, 6.5mm Grendel,  .357 Magnum
From the passage provided, extract the names of the two major Sanskrit epics of ancient India. Separate them with a comma.
Did Ramon Pileta compete in the Olympics
Write a compelling short story
What are some things that people commonly add to beer?
Where is the Black Strait Lake
What are the six ports that make up the port of Hamina-Kotka?
Alfred White was a famous author under which name
From the text, please list which Tesla models when ordered received free supercharging and for how long?
Based on the reference text, please provide a short bulleted list of 4 popular Halloween activities.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Amargasaurus, Black Rhino
What are magical creatures?
Does Almond Joy or Mounds have nuts?
How many letters there are in the hebrew language
What are the five largest countries in the world in terms of land area?
Name five teams in the Ligue 1 in France.
Who is William Shakespeare
Extract the occupations of Elie Wiesel from the text.
What are Uncontacted peoples?
Brainstorm a list of snacks to pack for a 3 year old and a 1 year old on a road trip
What are the primary causes of inflation?
Which is the well-known sport in India?
what are ways to improve public speaking skills?
Is an apple a fruit or a vegetable
Who is Magic Johnson?
Where does the word aurora come from?
Give me some cuisines I should try
Is there a Santa Claus and who is it?
Correct the typos and grammar in this passage
Based on this article, how did the existence of trains impact the development of Roche Percee?
Classify the below numbers into odd or even.
1, 4, 5, 333, 67, 88, 100
Is a square classified as a rectangle, or is a rectangle classified as a square?
Extract the airlines mentioned in the text and separate them with a comma.  Which one operated the shortest flight?
From the passage note down the various stars of the movie Rise of the Planet of the Apes. List the results in comma separated format.
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Guinea pig, Common
List down few details about CURE algorithm from given text
Give me a json array containing Arsenal stadiums and the year that they moved in based on the passage provided.
What is F1 or Formula 1 racing?
Aztec civilization originated from which country?
Categorize actions that would be effective in the event of a major earthquake as either 'effective' or 'not effective’. A. Check information via radio. B. Secure an evaculation route. C. Stay wherever you originally are. D. Use a car. E. Turn off a fire when you’re cooking.
What shape is the constellation of Orion?
Think of 3 shades of dark red that I could use to describe a rug
In what ways can having children improve your quality of life?
What are the unique characteristics of the Jindo dog breed?
What is the ICC ?
What is Skyrim?
Give me a list of the best romantic comedies
What are Vedas?
Which of these are ski mountains and which are deserts: Killington, Stowe, Sahara, Kalahari, Palisades, Gobi, Northstar, and Kirkwood.
Given the paragraph what are the recommended places to visit in Las Vegas?
How do you cook a Texas brisket?
How to make a traditional cup of English tea?
Give me an example of a business model with a mission statement.
What is the oldest hiking trail in the US?
What is a surf board used for?
What is Indian Premier League?
Summarise the biography of Andrew Huberman and his most popular achievements.
Is Python better than R?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Tell me if the following tourist attractions in Barcelona are free or paid: Park Güell, Parc de la Ciutadella, La Boqueria, Tibidabo, Casa Battló, La Rambla, Born Centre Cultural, La Sagrada Familia, La Pedrera, La Barceloneta, Palau de Música Catalana, Camp Nou
Are the following colours considered primary colours or not: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet
Which french football player is considered one of the best strikers of all time?
How large is the Gull Harbour and where exactly is it located
Who is the winningest college women's basketball coach?
Why is recycling important
Given this paragraph about the Subaru Outback, in what year was the Wilderness trim introduced?
Which film holds the record for most Academy Award wins?
What is the biological term for Magic Mushrooms?
According to the following paragraph on LeBron James, how did he announce joining the Miami Heat?
Where did the marathon come from?
What are some different snacks I could bring to a kids' soccer game?
What is the difference between NumPy and pandas?
Why is skiing a great sport?
What should I do to maximize my chances of getting into a top business school?
There are two definitions currently used for subtropical cyclones depending on which two geographic locations?
Extract all unique clubs Suyash played for from the below text as a bulleted list.
Where was Jeff Bezos born?
Based on the below text, which expansion pack for Red Alert featured the player fighting an army of mutant ants?
Extract, in order from largest earning to smallest, the biggest earning markets for the premier of Moana, the 2016 Disney film.
how does an electric car work
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Hydraulophone, Mandriola
What is the best password?
Who are Gaunt's Ghosts?
Why should I rent my house to you?
What is a good present for my wife?
What decade is the Great Gatsby set in, and what is the nickname for that time period?
In the game Dungeons and Dragons, players can be spell casters or non-spell casters. Sort this list into those two categories: Wizard, Bard, Ranger, Barbarian, Cleric, Druid, Rogue, Sorcerer, Warlock, Fighter and Monk.
Who was among the famous Roman poets?
Categorize these world leaders as male or female: Angela Merkel, Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan, Vladimir Putin, Mao Tse Tung, Winston Churchill, Queen Elizabeth I
You are a product manager at an enterprise software company Y. Your CEO has asked you to write a report on how well the company supports X capabilities. Provide a template email to send to my CEO that includes a TLDR and a link to the report. Use “<” and “>” to denote placeholder text I need to customize.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Damphu, Dulcimer
What type of babies did Regalado say Jiankui was making?
Based on this paragraph, how many jobs are created by tourism in Germany?
What would you consider when preparing a Dj set?
Name the largest cities in Canada
Locate the classification of Picasso's work over time on the text, extract including the description and the period, and place them in a bullet list
Neeraj Chopra the Tokyo Olympic Gold Medallist won the Silver Medal at
From the text provided, give me a summary of the most popular attractions in Yosemite National Park.
What is the difference between a sitar and a tanpura?
List me down some key aspects about windmills from given text.
What is SAS language?
Why did Ken Shamrock change his last name?
What are the best types of plants to grow in Austin, Texas?
From the passage list down the various continental confederations under FIFA. List the results in comma separated format.
Name a few great fantasy book series.
What are some of the most well-known castles in the Loire Valley in France?
Why we have different seasons on earth?
Write a dplyr statement takes a dataframe, filters it by the tastiness string column for "super awesome" then creates a new column called pct_sugar that takes the total_sugar metric and divides it by mass
What is a recession?
Why was the European Union founded?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
In which medium does sound travel faster and why
What does nationwide do?
Is Chen Ruo Bing a Chinese or Japanese artist?
Which cities did some of the most famous English rock bands come from?
Why was the movie The Happytime Murders given such bad reviews if it was award winning?
How to make a Pizza dough?
What is absolute URL?
What is a hunting dog?
Classify each of the following as "Motorized" or "Not Motorized": Bicycle, Skateboard, Car, Lawn Mower, Tractor, Golf Cart
Describe ways to deal with naughty kids as a parent
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Veena, Mizmar
Tell me whether these are sandwiches or cereals: Shredded wheat, honey bunches of oats, Frosted Flakes, Cheerios.
From the following paragraph, what is the main conclusion about the halting problem?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Galgo, Huobosi
What do west coast oysters taste like?
Given the following paragraph about a laptops, why are laptops called "laptop"?
Classify each of the following as either elements or minerals: oxygen, cobalt, phosphorus, nitrogen, graphite, quartz, carbon, and clay.
Extract the name and the release year of the albums of the rock band Pink Floyd. Place them  in a bullet list and separate name and year with a comma
Why do people like cats?
Why is merino wool a great material for clothing?
Who is the most decorated olympian of all time?
From the passage identify the subtypes of Hepatovirus A. Display the results in comma separated format.
What is the former prince of Wales is now referred as?
Why do people drink coffee in the morning?
Tell me whether these are movies or books: Gone with the wind, The Canterville Ghost, Battleship
Which of the following are not noble gases: helium, sodium, neon, oxygen, argon, hydrogen, calcium, magnesium, lithium, boron, krypton, nitrogen, xenon, aluminium, radon.
What is the difference between a piano and a guitar?
From the given paragraph extract all the cities that got the rail along with the year in the format {City} - {Year} and show as a bullet list
What is the best way to learn basketball?
What does this mean: "Steady-state theory"?
What is contrast therapy used for?
How is chocolate made?
Tell me which of the following movies are intended for adult or child audiences: The Godfather, Monsters Inc, Scream, When Harry Met Sally, Frozen II, E.T.
What wine is the Oregon Willamette Valley known for?
Mention Taylor’s work in terms of Music videos and acting.
Given this paragraph about Selena Gomez, where did her first name come from?
From the text, give me a short list of people the musician Bruce Gilbert collaborated with.
What is the mascot of Cornell University?
Give me a bulleted list of the top 10 NBA basketball players of all time
Which rock band from the 2000s is the most influential?
Write a story with the theme "Be wise when you speak."
Classify each of the following as characters who appear in books by Kevin Kwan or Veronica Roth: Astrid Leong-Teo, Kitty Pong, Colin Khoo, Peik Lin Goh, Charlie Wu, Caleb Prior, Beatrice Prior, Tori, Jeanine Matthews, Tobias Eaton
What are the risks of social isolation?
How would you define electricity based on the following paragraph?
Which is a species of fish? Pitbull or Tuna
What is sbt in Scala?
Can you list some good books written by Indian authors based on Indian mythology?
Which Australia Rules Football team has won the most grand finals?
Who has been elected as the 15th President of India?
Provide a list of ingredients to fill a burrito with
What is "woke" and why is it so controversial?
Who is Pana Chand Meghwal
What is the difference between American football and European football?
What is the capital of the Netherlands?
What activities can I use to entertain my ten year nephew this weekend?
Give me a list of the world's most popular leaders at the moment.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Seaworth?
List the major internet search engines
What is the oldest musical composition in the world?
Give me a list of your favor pet and breeds
What can you produce by chopping down a tree?
Who is Micky Mouse?
Who is the greatest cricketer of all time.
Which is the best place to have Masala Dosa in Bangalore
Why is the Uniqlo round mini shoulder bag so popular right now?
What athlete created the 'beast quake' for the Seattle Seahawks?
Please give me a bulleted list of things William Eldred Toye CM worked on
Why Pouilly Fumé wine going well with pesto spaghetti?
Given a reference text about combat readiness, tell me which troops are kept most ready for combat.
List the trim levels available for the F-150 Lightning.  Separate them with a comma.
What is an ice pop?
What are some common data warehouse challenges?
What is Augusta National Golf Club?
Who is responsible for deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia?
What are the pros and cons of outdoor and indoor soccer?
What chinese like drinking hot water?
Is the Guinness Book of World Records legitimate?
What are the primary characteristics of pluralism (also known as interest group liberalism or polyarchy)? What are the main criticisms of this theory?
Give me a bulleted list of major soccer leagues in Europe.
Is it better to invest in the stock market or to keep money in a savings account?
How many inches are in a mile?
Does Spark require modified versions of Scala or Python?
In The Big Lebowski, The Dude can't stand which band?
Given the reference text, what is the female equivalent of Karl?
List five titles by Isaac Asimov.
What's the moroccan biodiversity ?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Salt Lake City
5 fruits more healthy than apples
What is a use case?
When was the Tesla Factory in Fremont purchased by Tesla?
I want to get in shape. What nutrition and exercise program should I follow?
Who is the NBA's all time leading scorer?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Chikara, Bamboula
What are the essential skills required for a communication?
What kind of species is the Blissus insularis
What did Jordan Akins do after retiring from baseball?
How can I help a homeless person?
Without quoting the text, explain to me why the One Mile telescope was built
how is kirkland central park tennis center
Why is driving in convertibles fun?
What is POP3 protocol?
Tell me another joke
Given a reference text about Anne Elizabeth Howells, tell me the names' of her parents and how she died.
What are some high-potential cryptos with low marketcaps?
Which of the following are Great Lakes and Oceans: Michigan, Atlantic, Superior, Eire, Pacific, Huron, Ontario, Arctic, Indian
Name the top 10 Manchester United Scorers of all time and how many goals they scored?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Cello, Danso
What was the name of the character Steve Buscemi played in the HBO series BoardWalk Empire?
Who were supporters of Quit India movement?
Which items are not allowed when passing through TSA security? baby carrier, empty water bottle, dog, box cutters, baseball bat, bike, axe, cooking spray
Who are the founders of OpenAI?
Give me a bulleted list of the five biggest cities in Germany
What is Long COVID?
What are two species of beavers?
Which notable person having surname Liebers in this list was born first?
Given this paragraph, what are some examples of long short-term memory (LSTM) use cases?
From the passage identify the locations of the ICICI Bank branches and its subsidiaries outside India. Display the results in comma separated format.
Given a reference text about the Dormouse, in which novel is it a character?
Classify each of the following water bodies as oceans and seas: Pacific, Arabian, Caspian, Atlantic
My chickens keep getting eaten by foxes. What should I do?
How are people from the Netherlands called (in English)?
What are the main use cases for AWS Kinesis?
Please give me a bulleted list of the fundamentals of baseball
Classify each of the follow as a Movie or TV Show: Friends, The Office, Departed, The Town, Breaking Bad, Braveheart
Who amongst these are from India: Virat Kohli, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, 
Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams, Andre Agassi, Sachin Tendulkar, Ricky Ponting, Anil Kumble, Harmanpreet Kaur, Mithali Raj, Sarah Taylor.
Who is the current prime minister of India?
Which of the following are men scientists: Marie Curie, Elizabeth Blackwell, Jane Goodall, Rosalind Franklin, Ada Lovelace, Maria Mitchell, Archimedes, Albert Einstein, Ernest Rutherford, Alfred Nobel, Alexander Fleming, Michael Faraday, Niels Bohr, Stephen Hawking, Alan Turing.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kendang, Gekkin
What spices are in shawarma seasoning?
Conceive a plot for a John Wick movie which includes redemption and closure
Write a short paragraph on the impact of nutrition on human health.
What is Vue.js?
What are the Wimbledon Championships?
What is Apache Hive?
Given a reference text about Amanecer, who made the album and what viral song did it include?
Who won an Oscar for the African Queen
Given this paragraph about Drangajökull, tell me where it's located.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bendir, Rabel
How can I do a figure skating salchow jump?
Given the reference text about the history of the Olympic marathon distance, tell me what was the distance of the Olympic marathon during the 1924 Olympics in Paris in kilometers?
What is the history of Tax Day in the United States?
How do you play an E major chord on a guitar?
Which of the following is a famous food in Dali County Shaanxi Province in China: Waterbasin Lamb, Roujiamo, fried dumplings
Why is there an Irish pub everywhere you go?
Who are the most famous athletes in Seattle sports history?
What are some fun things to do on Oahu?
I'm a 12-year-old girl and I want to have my own cellphone because everyone else in my class have one. I just want to be part of the group and join their conversations. My mother did not refuse my request, but she asked me how to solve her concerns about the potential harm to me. What should I do to convince her to give me a cellphone? Here are here concerns:
1. Using cellphone too much would harm your eye sight. Especially for teenagers, whose eyes are still growing, it's very easy to have near-sight pretty quickly.
2. Using cellphone too much would take too much of your time, and you would spend less time reading books, doing exercises, playing outside, talking to people, which harms your overall development. Adults like me already ready lots of books, did lots of exercises, and talked to a lot of people when I was a teenager, so I already developed those skills.
3. Using cellphone too much would make you feel hard to focus on one thing. The scattered information would stimulate your attention, and make you feel excited at superficial contents, and don't think deeply.
4. You might accidentally lost your cellphone, and you will feel sad about it. Teenagers usually are more likely to lost things than adults in general.
Can you respond with concrete plans to prevent the harmful results so that my mom can be convinced?
Extract the name of the country where Djidonou was born.
What is a database schema?
From the passage provided, display a list of reviews in the format: {Reviewer name} - {Review}
Summarize the types of propaganda students distributed during the Tiananmen Square protests and massacre in a bulleted list.
Which is a species of fish? Power or Powen
Describe thunderstorm season in the United States and Canada.
What is home automation and how can it be used?
What do you think is the best Kanye album of all time?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bonang, Chiwang
What is the movie Forrest Gump about
Karl Lienstater discovered which medical breakthrough in 1901
Classify each of these as either a green fruit or a yellow fruit: kiwi, banana, granny smith apple, starfruit, grape
Where does the sun rise and set?
Using given text as a reference, write some details about game Crashmo
Who is the greatest golfer of all time?
Do vegetarians eat meat?
At a college graduation ceremony, each graduate is handed a diploma and sunflower. Aaron, Fiona, and Noor are three graduates. Only Fiona is allergic to sunflowers. As she exits the stage, Fiona sneezes but Aaron and Noor do not. Why does Fiona sneeze but not the other two?
How should I sleep train my baby?
What are 5 totally distinct, creative ways to use a glass of water?
Write a short story about Batman, Superman and Spiderman
Extract the nationalities of the population of the Azores islands in Portugal. Separate them with a comma.
Name some popular computer games from early this millenia.
List some titles from Ray Bradbury.
Are these cities or countries: Tokyo, Riyadh, Florence, Monteverde, Nafplio
Give me a list of 5 well known Nordic Gods and Goddesses.
What are the ten tallest buildings in the world?
Can you tell me about the Chicago Bears?
Give me a list of the top 5 things I should do to prepare for a holiday abroad
Given this paragraph about bull sharks, how long are adult female adult sharks in feet?
Based on this information that I have shared about Abel Janszoon Tasman, can you summarize it for me?
“Social Distancing”  refers to keeping a safe distance of
List some of the games that improve brain function.
What part of history called a fervent period of European cultural, artistic, political, and economic “rebirth” following the Middle Ages?
Based on this passage, please provide a bullet-point list of the processes used to prepare semiconducting materials for integrated circuits (ICs).
Classify these as positive or negative reviews: "Interesting concept but execution left a lot to be desired", "Would have loved it but the main character was completely 1D", "One of the best horror books I've read in years", "Would see it again"
Give me a bulleted list of the winners of the The Masters Tournament for the last decade.
Ideas on how to cure my dog's red paws.
Make me a list of all the different ways I could tell my sister about a recent vacation
Given a reference text about Sean Dunphy, tell me where he is buried.
What component do you need to have to build a PC?
What are Heat Shock proteins?
Tell me whether these are metals or non-metals: Sodium, Helium, Aluminum, Chlorine, Gold
Which is the last dynasty in China?
Why is soccer so popular?
What is a Moluccan hanging parrot?
Are you going for a walk today?
From the passage provided, extract the names of moons/natural satellites of Mars.
How to make a dish thicken fast without adding cream or starch?
Give me the list of philosophers of science from the 19th century
From the passage note down the awards won by Babaluku. List the results in comma separated format.
Give me a funny fact
What does long hair say about a woman?
Q: Will Miracle Mineral Solution (MMS) cure COVID-19?
Given this paragraph about Twitter, how can programmers connect to Twitter when building custom applications?
Where is the language Zimba spoken?
Summarize legacy of ibn-Batuta
Summarize best way to climb Mount Everest
How many children did James S. Wall have?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Hovasaurus, Green Turtle
What is the difference between a day on Earth and Mars?
Tell me about Clarence Adams
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kouxian, Tres cubano
Mary is twice as old as Elizabeth. John is two years older than Elizabeth. John's and Elizabeth's ages combined equal eight. How old is Mary? Explain your reasoning.
What are the three original citrus fruits?
Tell me whether these are states or cities: Massachusetts, Denver, Wyoming, Los Angeles, Miami, and Alabama.
What are the five best places to hike in the San Francisco Bay Area and why?
Is SAS a language or a software product?
Is The Last Of Us Part I a good PC game?
Jot down some important points about optical illusion from the given passage.
What is geovisualization?
Think of different types of pies that can be served at dinner.
Write an email to my friend who lives in Minneapolis to help convince them to move to Austin Texas.
How much money comes in a game of Monopoly?
Based on the paragraph below, describe 2 suitable applications of noble gases.
Which festival takes place next to Walibi Holland every year in august?
Who was the first Grand Prix driver to used a safety belt in 1967
What are the lesser known Jewish holidays?
According to the text what are the most common symptoms of COVID-19?
What is Utah known for?
Why do people like the band 'My Morning Jacket?'
Can you tell me which of the following are days and which are months? Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, October, March, February.
From the text below, extract the year and the VR headset and the company that released it in the format {Year}-{Headset Name}-{Company} and place them in a bullet list
Why was the iPhone such a successful product?
Tell me whether each of these wines is red or white: Merlot, Pinot Noir, Pinot Gris, Malbec, Syrah, Riesling, Chardonnay
Given a reference text about Hanlon's razor, when did the adage become well-known?
Classify each of the following as either a dog or cat: Golden Retriever, Domestic Short Hair, Black Labrador Retriever, Siamese, Dachshund, Ragdoll
Write me a recipe for pizza dough
Classify each of the following a muscle in the arm or leg: quadricep, bicep, tricep, forearm, calf
Classify each of the following as either transportation modes or brands of vehicles: Audi, Bus, Train, Airplane, Ship, Ford, Acura, Volkswagen.
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: inch, millimetres
What did Michael Faraday and Georg Ohm do?
In the main four professional sports leagues, what professional sports teams don't end in "S?"
The final of Asia cup was held in UAE, was won by Sri Lanka from which country
Tell me which of these States' shapes have exactly four sides: Utah, Colorado, Florida, Washington, California.
Name late 19th century scientists credited with making electricity an essential tool for modern life.
Tell me a story
Who is Christopher Hope
Why is salt important in cooking?
How are healthcare organizations thinking about their strategy to improve healthcare delivery?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tombak, Cizhonghlu
What is Cricket?
Why are semantic HTML elements important to use?
What books would you recommend someone read to improve their general knowledge of the world?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tambourine, Esraj
Given these two paragraphs, where did Jimmy Carter go to college?
What are modifiers in English?
What genre of music would best represent the Grateful Dead: Americana, Country, psychedelic rock, blue grass, all of the above
Can you sort these events from newest to oldest: James Cameron's movie Titanic was released, Leo Messi won world cup for Argentina, Barak Obama became president.
Classify each of the following as renewable or non-renewable forms of energy: Coal, solar, wind, natural gas, nuclear, hydroelectric, petroleum
What is a hockey hat trick ?
How can a technical expert identify a business use case?
What was the deadliest battle in history?
When was Belgium founded?
What was the Triceratops diet?
Extract the names of the countries that has occurrence of Stereospermum kunthianum from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What University has most Heisman Trophy winners?
what's the tallest mountain in the world
Given a reference text about Bully, tell me when it premiered and what it was about.
How can a football training session be planned?
Give me a comma separated list of stone fruit I could buy at the market
Which team won the 2022 Fifa World Cup?
What factors contributed to the decline of AI research in the 1970s?
Given this paragraph about Museo Municipal Taurino Francisco Montes, where is it located?
Based on the passage, which directors were considered for directing the Spider-Man movie apart from Raimi?
Given a reference text about the IBJJF, provide two tournaments organized by IBJJ and the ruleset used by these tournaments.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Gardener?
What are the names of the different scores you can shoot for each hole when golfing?
How many prototypes were made?
As per WHO Marburg Virus Disease(MVD) is a severe often fatal haemorrhagic fever it was earlier known as
I would like to build an investment portfolio with a balance of short term and longer term investments. For short term I would like a return on investment within two years. Please tell me which of these investments fall into the short-term bucket and which are longer-term:  10 year Treasury Bonds, Growth Stocks, Bitcoin, Index Funds, Precious Metals, High-yield Savings Accounts, 1-2 year Treasury Bonds, Real Estate.
What are the benefits of a high protein diet
Give me the details of Ezekiel's Temple
If we wanted to play sports that involve a ball, which of these would we play: soccer, football, swimming, snowboard, skiing, baseball.
Tell me which one does not fit with the group:  Dog, Horse, Goat, Cat, Fox
When did Lebron James become the NBA's all time leading scorer?
What is the most likely solution to fermi's paradox
Why is India a major outsourcing partner for Information technology services?
Which of the following numbers is a real number: -200, -1.5, -1, 0, 1, 1.5, 200, pi, e, sqrt(-1)?
On which day did Theodore Roosevelt lose both his first wife and his mother?
What are the most important tools to own when I am an apartment renter?
Who are the top 25 regular season career points scorers in the NBA to date?
What is the billboard number one in the top 10 of 1980?
Who directed the premiere episode of season four of Game of Thrones?
Why are mama's boys the worst partners?
Which is a species of fish? Seahorse or Arabian
What year did Wyoming become a state?
find the most famous historical places in Egypt
What is the best time to study
Who and when was the compass invented?
Why is baseball considered such a quintessential US sport?
What is mutually assured destruction?
here is some information about Ross McLean, how many years was Ross president of the Leavue of help for sick and elderly?
Provide a bulleted list of easy accommodations for autistic individuals in the workplace.
What is the difference between it's and its?
Argue that large language models are not conscious.
Give me five tips for practicing a speech.
When giving examples of what is a verb and what is a noun, explain which of these words falls into which category. Slowly, wipe,  tidily, fully, jump, yell, sleep, talk, hopelessly.
What is the best way to get from one place to another?
Which city is best in Australia
Classify each of the following as either computer hardware or computer software: hard drive, text editor, keyboard, monitor, mouse, operating system, and Internet browser.
What is efficient market hypothesis?
write a short essay fire fighters working on California wild fires
Give me a list of the best golf movies I've never seen.
Who is Milka Ivić?
Tell me whether these are literary genres or titles of books: Non-fiction, 1984, Mystery, The lost girls of paris, Fiction, Narrative, The one and only Ruby, Mary Poppins, Science fiction.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Flexatone, Ek Tare
Which are the states in India with coastlines?
How to find a boyfriend or girlfriend?
what is north america
Who was General Sir Henry Clinton
What is the 2008 Scottish Labour deputy leadership election?
Classify each of the following as either a wine varietal or style of beer: Lager, Ale, India pale ale, Sauvignon Blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot Noir
What is Doña Barbara?
The first Battle of Panipat was fought in the year
Who are the tallest people in the world?
Based on the following passage when do schools close and resume after summer holidays in the United States?
Give me a bulleted list of ways to get around New York City.
is operations a great career
Tell me which of these activities are exciting and which are relaxing.
how to handle loneliness in your life?
What popular wine varietal is produced in Washington?
Where can I go to workout?
How many large victories did Nelson have and what were the scores?
Classify these as a synthetic or natural fiber
Please list several after school activities my 8 year old daughter can participate in.
What are AAC devices used for?
When is a good time to  buy a car?
What kind of species is the Epophthalmia
Who is Doom Guy?
What is nihilism and why do some people believe it? List some ways that philosophers have proposed to fight against nihilism. Explain to me in a casual tone
Tell me three ways to get coconut from a coconut tree
List all the places and countries mentioned in the paragraph in the format [Place] separated by comma.
What are the top 7 cities to ride a bicycle?
What is Elzéar Abeille de Perrin known for?
What are some fun, safe ways to break a social norm without breaking a law?
Give me a list of places to go in San Diego, CA with kids
Which is a species of fish? Poacher or Hunter
What are the top 4 healthier sodas that I should buy?
When was IGFBP3 first characterized?
Write an introductory email to a student I will be academically coaching through Services for Students with Disabilities office (SSD).
What is the essence of utilitarianism?
Where were the 13th South Asian Games held?
What is the fastest air-breathing manned aircraft?
Why do people travel to different places.
Is the USS Rachel Seaman made of metal?
What is the best stock to buy right now?
Can any piece promote to a queen?
Given a reference text about the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, how many Super Bowls have they won.
Tell me which of these are titles from William Gibson: The Peripheral, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, Foundation, Neuromancer, Mona Lisa Overdrive, Count Zero, Pattern Recognition, The Last Question, Jennifer Government
What is American Red Cross
What is microeconomics?
Extract and list the names of characters a player can control in The Last of Us mentioned in the paragraph. Also describe relationships between those characters.
Should high school students be allowed to drink coffee?
What is a mitochondrion?
Classify each word as a noun, verb, or adjective: playground, eating, skinny, chubby, tall, sleeping, bed
Extract what model originated the first practical definition of a digital twin as well as the name of the organization and the year of creation separated by dashes
What are five cities in the state of North Carolina?
How did Frank Stagg die?
Based on the reference text, which album helped Taylor Swift shift from a country star to more of a pop star?
Which artist's entire 1985 Live Aid set consisted of just a single cover song?
What’s your favorite color?
Extract the family that Eudaronia is part of from the text.
Explain Cricket game
What are important elements to consider when putting together a team to execute your operating model for AI?
From this passage tell me why Panama Canal is called one of the seven wonders of the modern world
Why am I so tired?
How would you describe the differences between Indian and Western music, especially as it relates to the sense of pitch?
Who were King Aenys I Targaryen's children?
How do airplanes land?
Give me a list of benefits of swimming
Given a reference text about Minister for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries of Denmark, when was the position created and was was it named?
What is hybrid working?
Which of the following movies is not from the Harry Potter Franchise? 
-  Order of the Phoenix.
- Goblet of Fire.
- Sorcerer's Stone.
- Chamber of Secrets.
- The Fellowship of the rings.
What has the IETF ALTO working group accomplished?
What is a calendar?
Who invented Boltzmann Machines?
Given these paragraphs about Large language models, when did LLMs emerge?
List the television series Kang Se-jung appeared in
Tell me whether these are European countries or names of bands: Spain, France, Norway, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Portugal, Brazil, South Africa, Canada, China, Orca, Gorillas, Camel, Bee Gees, Coldplay, Green Day, Lamb of God, Maroon 5, Pink Floyd
What causes leaves to change color in fall
Imagine you are the last person on Mars. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
The Bud Freeman All-Stars featuring Shorty Baker
What two colors are used in the Canadian flag?
Who was the first player sent off during a soccer match?
Which of the following grow on trees?: apples, lemons, potatoes, carrots
How can I change a bad habit?
Give me some of the most famous characters Marvel Comics has produced from this list.
What text data set examples of Generative artificial intelligence
Write the first paragraph of a blog post describing the appeal of gravel bikes in the bay area.
What are some interesting facts about tigers?
How many full-length "The X-Files" movies are there?
Classify each of the following music genres as broadly popular or niche: Rock, Hip Hop, Pop,   Heavy Metal, Bluegrass, Country
What is the difference between a bath and a shower?
What is the national bird of India
What is insurance?
What are the steps to put an elephant into a fridge?
Tell me whether each of these refers to the book called "Don Quixote": "Don Quixote", "El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha", "El Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha", "El Quijote", "The Man Who Killed Don Quixote", "Don Quixote, Knight Errant"
Given a reference text about Will Ferrell, tell me where he kickstarted his career, what group of comic actors he is considered part of, and how many Golden Globe Award nominations he has.
How long is a mile?
Name a few Bhakti poets from the passage.
Why is basketball the fastest growing sport in the world?
What is the difference between Malayalam and Malayalaee?
How does interest rates and inflation impact bond prices?
Why is pickleball the greatest sport on the planet?
Extract the areas of science using differential equations in this text in an alphabetically ordered list.
What are calibration frames in astrophotography?
Write 5 distinct, unique and creative statements that help someone think about Friedrich Nietzsche's "Beyond Good & Evil", which critically analyzes the idea of binaries in complexity
What civilization built temples across the Yucatan peninsula?
Why do we say tip of the iceberg?
Classify the following as either airplanes or helicopters:
- EC-135
- DC-10
- Antonov An 225
- Boeing 787
- Bell 206
- MD-500
- MD-11
- Airbus A320
- Airbus H165
- Cessna 172
Think of things to do in a place with cold winters. Provide answer as a bullet list.
If you are considering buying a bicycle consider your budget, look up the reviews online, talk to friends, and test them out!
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Wobble board, Scheitholt
What is a Fully paid share?
What happened on September 11, 2001?
Who is the company Novartis
The "Garbage collection" log of a JVM is formatted as follows:
1. Each line represents a single garbage collection operation starting at the timestamp. 
2. The before and after sizes of different memory areas in the JVM are shown as  "MemoryArea : BeforeSize->AfterSize(AllocatedSize)" where MemoryArea is one of PSYoungGen, ParOldGen, or Metaspace. 
3. If the "MemoryArea:" is omitted, it represents the before and after size of the entire JVM's memory. 
4. Each line has the time taken for the operation in seconds. 

Summarize the following log and note any significant anomalies:
2023-03-30T07:00:19.800+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 17197776K->2224032K(21782528K)] 64496630K->49524856K(79218176K), 3.2658630 secs] [Times: user=4.53 sys=0.00, real=3.27 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:01:06.553+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 17471392K->2195300K(22969344K)] 64772216K->49530782K(80404992K), 3.3074224 secs] [Times: user=4.63 sys=0.00, real=3.30 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:01:56.129+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 19045732K->2429792K(22598656K)] 66381214K->49767742K(80034304K), 3.5912859 secs] [Times: user=4.94 sys=0.00, real=3.59 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:02:46.034+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 19280224K->2428421K(23520768K)] 66618174K->49768148K(80956416K), 3.6520001 secs] [Times: user=5.07 sys=0.03, real=3.65 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:03:39.130+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 20488709K->2600800K(23257088K)] 67828436K->49943004K(80692736K), 3.8378192 secs] [Times: user=5.19 sys=0.00, real=3.84 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:04:31.634+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 20661088K->2550592K(23885312K)] 68003292K->49894476K(81320960K), 3.7886199 secs] [Times: user=5.15 sys=0.00, real=3.78 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:05:28.784+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 21416768K->2709510K(23698432K)] 68760652K->50055163K(81134080K), 3.9951697 secs] [Times: user=5.54 sys=0.00, real=3.99 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:06:24.857+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 21575686K->2709696K(24113664K)] 68921339K->50058933K(81549312K), 4.0210395 secs] [Times: user=5.47 sys=0.01, real=4.02 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:07:21.991+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22106304K->2835749K(24000512K)] 69455541K->50186794K(81436160K), 4.0703042 secs] [Times: user=5.76 sys=0.00, real=4.06 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:08:18.668+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22232357K->2785312K(24265216K)] 69583402K->50204626K(81700864K), 4.1296625 secs] [Times: user=5.77 sys=0.00, real=4.13 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:09:16.891+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22510624K->2834405K(24177664K)] 69929938K->50255520K(81613312K), 4.2070487 secs] [Times: user=5.89 sys=0.01, real=4.21 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:10:15.553+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22559717K->2842896K(24403456K)] 69980832K->50266688K(81839104K), 4.2489383 secs] [Times: user=5.83 sys=0.02, real=4.24 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:11:15.412+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22863632K->2880069K(24334848K)] 70287424K->50306742K(81770496K), 4.2983311 secs] [Times: user=6.01 sys=0.00, real=4.29 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:12:17.330+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 22900805K->2670097K(24596992K)] 70327478K->50099432K(82032640K), 3.9450690 secs] [Times: user=5.44 sys=0.00, real=3.95 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:13:15.713+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23009297K->2684375K(24459776K)] 70438632K->50115773K(81895424K), 3.9758416 secs] [Times: user=5.53 sys=0.00, real=3.97 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:14:12.939+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23023575K->2678912K(24829952K)] 70454973K->50113093K(82265600K), 3.9702778 secs] [Times: user=5.52 sys=0.00, real=3.97 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:15:12.343+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23508608K->2753575K(24717312K)] 70942789K->50189628K(82152960K), 4.0754481 secs] [Times: user=5.72 sys=0.00, real=4.08 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:16:13.026+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23583271K->2762097K(24974336K)] 71019324K->50201762K(82409984K), 4.1128461 secs] [Times: user=5.66 sys=0.00, real=4.11 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:17:14.129+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23924593K->2797957K(24905728K)] 71364258K->50239629K(82341376K), 4.1456776 secs] [Times: user=5.74 sys=0.01, real=4.15 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:18:14.857+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 23960453K->2804721K(25075712K)] 71402125K->50249103K(82511360K), 4.1905285 secs] [Times: user=5.73 sys=0.01, real=4.19 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:19:15.979+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 24189937K->3641846K(25027072K)] 71634319K->51171235K(82462720K), 3.6175882 secs] [Times: user=5.94 sys=0.00, real=3.62 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:22:24.484+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 25027062K->3360979K(24336896K)] 72556451K->52269877K(81772544K), 0.4407322 secs] [Times: user=5.66 sys=0.00, real=0.44 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:22:38.974+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 24007379K->4035567K(24681984K)] 72916277K->57145380K(82117632K), 0.8531910 secs] [Times: user=10.80 sys=0.23, real=0.85 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:22:52.666+0000: [GC (Allocation Failure) [PSYoungGen: 24677029K->24677029K(24681984K)] 77786841K->82112670K(82117632K), 7.3509182 secs] [Times: user=22.60 sys=11.27, real=7.35 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:23:00.017+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 24677029K->0K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435641K->57435322K(57435648K)] 82112670K->57435322K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241941K->241941K(260096K)], 26.4487596 secs] [Times: user=313.82 sys=2.44, real=26.45 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:24:07.186+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->12427037K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435322K->57435609K(57435648K)] 78081722K->69862646K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241947K->241947K(260096K)], 28.8675082 secs] [Times: user=350.97 sys=1.74, real=28.87 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:24:36.057+0000: [Full GC (System.gc()) [PSYoungGen: 12730000K->12427055K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435609K->57435556K(57435648K)] 70165609K->69862611K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241947K->241947K(260096K)], 31.3736816 secs] [Times: user=379.38 sys=2.94, real=31.37 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:25:18.096+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->16985330K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435556K->57435308K(57435648K)] 78081956K->74420638K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241999K->241999K(260096K)], 31.4762980 secs] [Times: user=363.38 sys=3.10, real=31.48 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:25:54.537+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->19116969K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435308K->57435152K(57435648K)] 78081708K->76552122K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241999K->241999K(260096K)], 31.0418139 secs] [Times: user=377.34 sys=2.75, real=31.04 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:26:27.487+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->19955901K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435152K->57435290K(57435648K)] 78081552K->77391191K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 241999K->241999K(260096K)], 22.9475977 secs] [Times: user=280.80 sys=1.57, real=22.95 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:26:51.319+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20340549K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435290K->57435523K(57435648K)] 78081690K->77776072K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242004K->242004K(260096K)], 37.2564843 secs] [Times: user=458.29 sys=3.35, real=37.26 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:27:28.892+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20465997K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435523K->57435230K(57435648K)] 78081923K->77901227K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242007K->242007K(260096K)], 31.4213545 secs] [Times: user=382.65 sys=2.74, real=31.42 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:28:00.350+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20492397K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435230K->57435139K(57435648K)] 78081630K->77927536K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242011K->242011K(260096K)], 17.3069966 secs] [Times: user=209.34 sys=0.45, real=17.31 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:28:17.694+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20639999K->20482496K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435139K->57435581K(57435648K)] 78075138K->77918078K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242023K->242023K(260096K)], 39.0253664 secs] [Times: user=478.37 sys=3.87, real=39.02 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:28:56.752+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20629482K->20490559K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435581K->57435269K(57435648K)] 78065064K->77925828K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242023K->242023K(260096K)], 32.7146380 secs] [Times: user=398.86 sys=2.93, real=32.71 secs]
2023-03-30T07:29:29.592+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20627596K->20498740K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435269K->57435482K(57435648K)] 78062865K->77934223K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242029K->242029K(260096K)], 39.9805382 secs] [Times: user=491.39 sys=4.10, real=39.98 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:30:09.618+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20529006K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435482K->57435402K(57435648K)] 78081882K->77964408K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242038K->242038K(260096K)], 31.3632706 secs] [Times: user=382.46 sys=2.74, real=31.36 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:30:41.012+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20535638K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435402K->57435345K(57435648K)] 78081802K->77970983K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242053K->242053K(260096K)], 31.0060106 secs] [Times: user=377.25 sys=2.72, real=31.00 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:31:12.022+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20535719K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435345K->57435297K(57435648K)] 78081745K->77971016K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242053K->242053K(260096K)], 31.1714473 secs] [Times: user=380.42 sys=2.74, real=31.18 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:31:43.215+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20536490K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435297K->57435275K(57435648K)] 78081697K->77971766K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242061K->242061K(260096K)], 30.9676462 secs] [Times: user=377.19 sys=2.88, real=30.96 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:32:14.216+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20537679K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435275K->57435244K(57435648K)] 78081675K->77972923K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242081K->242081K(260096K)], 31.2592798 secs] [Times: user=379.77 sys=3.04, real=31.26 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:32:45.532+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20518698K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435244K->57435465K(57435648K)] 78081644K->77954164K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242123K->242123K(260096K)], 38.9523351 secs] [Times: user=478.26 sys=4.04, real=38.95 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:33:45.139+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20627835K->20519977K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435465K->57435334K(57435648K)] 78063301K->77955311K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242185K->242185K(260096K)], 31.8680480 secs] [Times: user=388.66 sys=2.88, real=31.87 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:34:17.045+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20529987K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435334K->57435313K(57435648K)] 78081734K->77965301K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242185K->242185K(260096K)], 30.6528436 secs] [Times: user=370.84 sys=3.05, real=30.65 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:35:08.312+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20552578K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435313K->57435312K(57435648K)] 78081713K->77987890K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242202K->242202K(260096K)], 31.3030289 secs] [Times: user=380.50 sys=2.90, real=31.30 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:35:39.649+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20541558K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435312K->57435297K(57435648K)] 78081712K->77976855K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242217K->242217K(260096K)], 31.4996226 secs] [Times: user=384.32 sys=3.00, real=31.50 secs] 
2023-03-30T07:36:11.199+0000: [Full GC (Ergonomics) [PSYoungGen: 20646400K->20562436K(24681984K)] [ParOldGen: 57435297K->57435260K(57435648K)] 78081697K->77997697K(82117632K), [Metaspace: 242238K->242238K(260096K)], 31.1358920 secs] [Times: user=378.46 sys=3.00, real=31.14 secs]
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Cimboa, Sipsi
Classify each country as "African" or "European": Nigeria, Rwanda, Portugal, Romania, Ghana, Ukraine
What was Charles Dickens last (unfinished) novel
Why do you like ballet so much?
Given this paragraph about Pablo Escobar, how much money did he have when he died?
Given a reference text that describes about hotpot, from which country does this dish originate?
Summarise the basic rules of soccer, without using examples from the text
Given this reference text about Cy Young, what type of work did his family do while he was growing up, how many older siblings did he have, and what two states did he live in as a child?
What movie make Kevin Smith famous?
Given this paragraph about the terrain of the Iberian Peninsula, tell me the highest point in the peninsula and its altitude.
What are the Fallas in Spain?
What is the coldest month in Warsaw and how cold does it get on average?
Why were the majority of African countries controlled by military dictatorships during the 1970's and 1980's?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kemence, Castanets
Tell me about the botanical garden?
From the passage provided, extract the year Adani group was founded.
Why do people like the Grateful Dead?
What is love?
Extract what units are strong against countering cavalry from the following text
What is parkrun
what are the earliest contests?
Can you please explain the offside rule in Soccer?
Who invented the game of basketball?
Name the women who visited International Space Station for repairing of ISS
What is a hurricane?
Classify the following major cities based on the typical weather in December if it is generally cold or generally warm: Chicago, Illinois; New York City, New York; and Miami, Florida
Name some of the objects in the solar system
What are vinyl records?
Please note down some points regarding Austrian Cup  from the given text
Who was Pythagoras?
Name five teams in Liga Portugal.
tell me a name which is colour and fruit
What is CST 11
Q: Is hand sanitizer effective against COVID-19?
How do I make good pour over coffee?
Classify the products based on the brand.
Android, safari, chrome, iOS, Alexa, prime videos
What is use of bezier curve in Robotics?
Extract the two names of the TV show series mentioned in this paragraph
What are the healthiest cooking methods for preparing meals?
What is the difference between a detail and an Inference
From the passage provided,  find the names of the sequels to the movie Captain America: The First Avenger. Separate them with a comma.
Tell me whether these are rivers or oceans: Nile, Amazon, Ganges, Hudson, Rhine
Identify the first run broadcast network (ABC, NBC, or CBS) of the following TV shows:
Castle, Chicago Fire, CSI, ER, Grey's Anatomy, Scandal, Seinfeld, Magnum PI
How do you get your pilot's license?
Think up of a bunch of different gifts you could give a teacher
Given this paragraph about WWII, how many fatalities happened?
categorize some popular sports as either 'safe', 'not so safe' or 'dangerous'.
My husband and I are planning a ten-day trip to Italy in September, is this a good time to visit?
What's the best part of having children?
Which ski resorts are close to Seattle?
Using given text, extract as many definitions of science fiction
According to the passage what is the best way of making progress with mathematics?
Extract the year that the Volvo XC40 was released.
What are symptoms of ‘Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)’?
Which of these shoe types are appropriate for running; boat shoes, derby shoes, hiking shoes, high heels, sneakers, sandals, tennis shoes, skating shoes, boats, mules
What is the best place for tacos in San Francisco?
Name some of the countries who have won the cricket world cup
Provide a possible jurisdiction section for a federal civil rights complaint leaving blanks for the location.
Who was the prophet Muhammad (pbuh)?
Extract all risk factors for developing cardiovascular diseases for which numbers about their  contribution are given and rank them by their relative importance.
What is the Altair based on the paragraph?
Given a reference text about Kennebunkport, tell me its neighboring towns and where it is located.
How much money did George Lucas get for selling Lucasfilm to Disney?
Summarize this paragraph
What is dopamine?
When was the first Fallout game released?
What are some tricks to baking a really good cake?
Who is the haas formula 1 team principal?
Where did Bob Ross learn to paint?
Who was the first Time Magazine Man of the Year?
What is Sleet?
What is impala?
Provide a bulleted list of things to think about when buying a house
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Iguanodon, Irrawaddy Dolphin
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Classify each of the following as safe or unsafe to eat for a human: hamburger, metal plate, iPhone, onion, tree, potato chip, candle, ice cream, backpack, sweater, boiled egg.
Where is the town of Guasipati
What was written in Ski-U-Mah?
Tell me an uplifting story about a recently departed dear friend and how she continues to inspire and guide me.  Use references from Star Wars to drive the point home.
Hello, how are you?
What are the three major Abrahamic religions?
Provide a summary of Nora Forster's career based on this passage.
Who is the best all-time chess player?
What is the difference between a banjo and a ukulele?
Ram was asked to repeat after the speaker. Speaker: Red, Ram: Red. Speaker: Blue, Ram: Blue. Speaker: Green, Ram: Green. Speaker: What's your name? , Ram: Ram

What went wrong here?
Which phone OS is better, IOS or Android?
Give me a one line summary of the story below: 

A long long time ago the Queen of Odisha heard that there was a master stone sculptor who made such stunning statues of the gods that people would weep from happiness at the beauty of the statues if they saw them. One summer day, while resting indolently with the King in the main hall of the royal palace, the Queen suddenly had a thought. "How nice it would be, King, if we could build some beautiful statutes of Lord Jagannath so that the people can come worship Jagannath, Balabhadra, and Subadhra. What do you think?" 

The King thought for a few minutes, and then nodded in agreement. "What do you have in mind, my Queen?" And so, soon the stone sculptor was summoned to appear before the Court for an appointment to build in his way the statutes of the gods. Soon the monsoon season started and the sculptor appeared in front of the court, awaiting his appointment. He was a humble man from the mountainous regions of Odisha. Even at his best-dressed, one couldn't help but notice his rough hands, and the small sprinkling of dust that seemed ever present in his hair. 

The King and Queen graciously waited as the sculptor bowed and then asked "Your majesties, what can I do for you?" The Queen leaned forward in her throne and her voice rang out in the court "We have heard, o Master Sculptor, of your skills from people far and wide across the Kingdom. We dream of having you put your skills to use to build beautiful statues that will represent Lord Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balabhadra for our people to worship."

The sculptor was silent. As his silence extended, ministers of the court began to feel restless. "Speak up! How can you be silent when the Queen graces you so!" But still, the sculptor was silent. 

The King and Queen sat patiently in their thrones as they waited for the sculptor to respond. Perhaps the enormity of the task was too much. Perhaps, the sculptor was thinking of what he should ask for in return. Or even more, perhaps, the sculptor was awed and honored by the request. 

At last, as the shadows from the late afternoon sun began to stretch across the floors of the hall, the sculptor shifted his weight, and opened his mouth to speak. "Your majesties, you grace me with such a request, I cannot help but oblige. It is an honor." At this, the Queen sat as straight as a rod, listening for the words that would come next. "But, I can do this on one condition only. I will work in a closed hall, where none may enter - regardless of whether they can hear me working or otherwise. None may enter until I open the doors from within and proclaim to all that the statues are completed."

The ministers gasped - what a strange request from this man. Was he a fool? What if he just slept and ate and didn't do any work? How could the King and Queen trust that he would do the work he was promising to do? The Queen looked on thoughtfully. She glanced at the King, and it seemed to her that he agreed on this condition without reservation. She looked at the sculptor and then nodded her assent. "We decree that you shall build these statues in a hall set aside, into which no one shall enter until your work is complete and you proclaim that to us after opening the doors of the hall from within."
Which two of the world's "super power" nations engaged in a cold war, following World War II?
What is the Monument to the Victims of the Holocaust?
Why does oil float on water?
Give  me a list of cities where I can stop/stay as I drive from Austin to Chicago by road
Why is crypto currency risky?
What are some items you can put on a bookshelf, other than books, to make it nice looking.
Which of the following instruments have keys: harp, piano, cello, guitar, spinet, mandolin, bagpipe, bongo, clavinet, accordion, flute, bass, marimba, synthesizer, recorder, organ, melodica, sitar
What is the difference between an evergreen and deciduous tree?
Who is Luis Palomino
Who owns the canoe named The Island Bird?
What are some physical health benefits from doing strength training exercises?
Why do we have work meetings?
Who is Andres Bello?
Do Ceanothus have shallow roots?
What is ICC Men's T20 World Cup?
classify the following items as income or spending: salary, movie, tax return, car rent, food
To which town in the UK did the Ford Motor Company relocate to in 1931?
Are these oceans or lakes: Superior, Michigan, Keuka, Ontario, Tahoe. and Yellowstone?
Give me a list of some of the best ski areas spread across the North America. Organize the list by the mountain region they belong to. Give a very short synopsis if desired about why that resort was selected.
Think up a couple of ways to use old shirts
Write a short story about a person who gets fired from his job, but ends up having the best day of his life.
What's the preferred mode of transportation in Vietnam?
Please write a story that puts a modern twist on a fairy tale
Given the reference text below, who sang "It's a Great Day to Be Alive"?
Extract the unincorporated communities in the below text that begin with starting with the letter R, W and G and put them in a pipe separated list
As Chancellor for the Universities of Uppsala and Lund, what did De Geer promote?
what are creative ways of gifting?
List all former departments that were formerly Cabinet-level in the United States.
Write a story about an ice fishing trip in Minnesota. Make sure to include what you need for a successful trip.
Where is the planet mars?
Give me a comma separated list of the main attractions in Tomar.
Given the text, write a summary of the effects of the Super Mushroom power-up in the Super Mario videogame series
Classify the following devices as "electronic" or "not electronic": iPhone, shovel, Samsung Galaxy, calculator, ladder, paper
Tell me if these are body parts or places: nose, beach, supermarket, feet, eyes, hand, mall, school, restaurant, heart
How to avoid world war?
What is L-AP4
What is Renaissance?
Based on this wikipedia paragraph, what original tool was Kubernetes based on?
Using the information in the paragraph, give me a short bulleted list of Arsenal football club's main achievements
Why is WiFi such a popular way to implement a home network?
Write me a script for an upcoming All Hands meeting about our IPO prospects and how employees need to act in the quiet period.
Name some Ivy League schools
Tell me which of these are sweet or salty: juice, potato chips, cake, cheese
What does a healthy morning routine look like?
What kind of sounds do Alpacas make?
What's the best way to brew an espresso?
who of the following are not soccer players from Argentina:  Diego Armando Maradona, Lionel Messi, Alfredo Di Stefano, Mario Alberto Kempes, and Mauro Camoranesi?
How do you make Cincinnati style Venison Chili?
What is the difference between futures and options?
Classify each of the following as root or shoot vegetables: tomato, potato, carrot, brinjal, onion, lady finger, cucumber, beets, sweet potato
What is an easy and delicious dish for me to cook for my date?
Who played Dr. Jerry Buss in the show Winning Time?
Classify the following items as either cars or trucks:  Ford F150, Audi A8, BMW 318i, Nissan Titan, Tesla Model 3
Classify the following animals as bipeds or quadripeds: dog, human, cow, chicken, ostrich, zebra, tyrannosaurus rex, tiger
where is Shelburne?
Who owns the best dog in the world?
What year was the first pizzeria in New York founded?
Extract the most commonly used term to describe bitcoin and simplify it in one sentence
What are some of the most famous fantasy books ever written?
Classify the fruits based on their color.
raspberries, lemon, strawberries, cranberries, star fruit, banana, cherries, apples
Earnst & Young Entrepreneur of the year awards 2021 was given to whom
What happens if you're lost in the Bermuda Triangle?
Why might I want to stay at home on a Friday night?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Baratheon?
Give me a bulleted list of the five most recent vice presidents of the U.S.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Black-footed Ferret, Dodo
What is a good Science fiction book?
Give me a popular quote from book, "The Little Prince".
What are redo logs in Oracle RDBMS?
Tell me something about the Dog Man comic
What is the best way to make an AreoPress coffee
Which company designed SoundBridge?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cabasa, Huqin
Extract the names of all the members of the Henry Holst String Quartet, and the instrument they played in bullet point form.
What is the difference between a guitar and bass?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary the game of chess
Please list the nicknames of the famed crime boss Stefano Magaddino, separated by a comma.
What year did the trek in Finding Farley end?
Classify the below numbers based on whether they are perfect square or not.
64, 9, 81, 100, 57, 16
What is an Angul Thermal Power Station
What did ancient cultures around the Mediterranean know about electricity?
What are the 13 villages in Newton, Massachusetts?
Why is the F-15EX Eagle II an ideal aircraft not an ideal aircraft for conducting modern offensive war fighting?
Extract the dates of change of ownership and who the new owner was
What are tacos?
What is Wimbledon?
What ingredients do I need to make a margarita?
Who said "Public service is my motto"
List the name of the areas surrounding Greece and group by directions from the passage. List the results in comma separated format.
Given this reference test, what is the daily recommended amount of magnesium for men in the UK?
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most recent presidents of Brazil
Who founded the Society of Jesus, and what are they more commonly known as?
What are 3 things to consider when picking a mountain to ski at?
Who is Anne Francis?
Which of these foods are likely to cause allergic reactions among humans: milk, peanuts, rice, grapes, wheat, lettuce, mint.
Can anyone play rugby?
What is the primary information in this paragraph?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rebana, Kudyapi
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ngoma drums, Zhuihu
Give me a list of things I can do to sleep better at night
classify the following as living vs non-living: plants, pants, bees, beer, mug, goat, pen, night lamp, cow, pig, phone, dog, leaf, candle, mosquito
Given a reference text about The Universal Data Element Framework (UDEF), tell me how the framework is used.
What is the difference between racquetball and tennis?
What is the third limb of yoga?
Why do birds migrate north to south for the colder months in the north?
What are the interests behind climate change denial?
What is an interchange fee?
Who founded the city of Detroit?
Tell me which of these are NFL teams: Bengals, Pumas, Seahawks, Falcons, Roadrunners, Eagles, Coyotes, Sheep, Bears.
Given this paragraph about flashcards, is flashcard useful for learning painting?
How can I join two pieces of wood together for making furniture or drawers?
What are the unofficial forms of written Norwegian ?
Of the following, which are characters from the TV show "I Love Lucy:" Lucy Ricardo, Ethel Mertz, Donald Trump, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Ricky Ricardo, Fred Mertz, Batman, John Smith
How has Kyle Shanahan faired while coaching the San Francisco 49ers?
Given the following paragraph about the history of tallest buildings, which was the first skyscraper and when was it build?
How many kids does Apu have on the Simpsons?
Give me a list of dog names
Classify each of the following as a programming language or not: Lisp, Basic, Esperanto, Prolog, Sympathy, Pascal, Tessellation, Kumquats, Algol, Java, C++, Corkscrew, Envy, Brainfuck
Based on the given passage tell me who masked cultists are?
Road Trip to Vegas via Death Valley, example guide
Classify each of these car manufacturers as either French, German, American, Japanese, or other: Lexus, Hyundai, Alfa Romeo, VW, Honda, GM, Citroen
What does Avici stand for
What are the steps I should take to become a data engineer for absolute beginner?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Calung, Maguhu
Why has West been a source of controversy recently?
Which is a species of fish? Perch or Purge
What is a good score to shoot in golf?
Extract the ingredients required to prepare guacamole from the text. Separate them with a comma.
What makes Barcelona a top tourist destination?
What are recommendations for some European cities to visit.
Given this paragraph about different types of eyes, how are eye types categorized and why?
Why do kids like to play Fortnite so much?
According to this paragraph about bull sharks, how long are male adult sharks in meters?
What are the best books of the 19th century?
What are different ways to lose weight?
Name four colleges in the Boston area.
Classify each of the following as supercar or hypercar:  Lamborghini Huracán, Ferrari 488GTB, Aston Martin Vantage, or Bugatti Veryron.
What format does Delta Lake use to store data?
Where should I go for vacation?
Can you give a list of novels written by Nancy Kress?
What are five channels for mass communications?
What continent is Peru a part of?
Identify which systems in this list are part of the Hadoop ecosystem : MapReduce, MySQL, Google apps, Hive, Pig
Instead of making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, what else could I combine peanut butter with in a sandwich? Give five ideas.
Share some key points about gem Ruby from the given text
Based on this passage, extract a list of the conditions associated with asthma and separate with commas.
What is Canada known for?
Which sport is the most popular worldwide?
What is relational database
Which of these foods are from North and South of India: Chicken Tikka, Chole Samosa, Chole Batura, Idli Sambar, Dosa, Upama, Tamarind Rice
Using the passage, please give some critical impacts that Twenty20 format had on the game of cricket?
In the series, A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Yew?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Teponaztli, Tricordia
What is the longest floating bridge in the world?
If the sponsor of the Burns and Allen show was Pee Wee Herman's Big Adventure, the show would be called what?
Give me a bulleted list of ingredients that I need to bake chewy chocolate chip cookies, and include volume measurements for any ingredient I have to measure out.
What are the different types of cancers?
Why does in-person contact create more impactful human connections than relationships based on purely virtual meetings?
Which items from this list are types of poems and which are types of insurance: sonnet, disability, haiku, limerick, auto, umbrella, whole life, and homeowners.
How to make Indian Lemonade?
What should I do if water is dripping from the ceiling inside my house?
What are the best river cruises for Europe?
Extract names of song xand the songwriters from the passage and separate them by dot
Why did Captain Bligh sail to Tahiti?
is customer service a great career
Tell me which of the following are tropical fruits: Passion fruit, Lychee, Apple, Strawberry
What is IAAS?
How do I write a promo packet?
List down some key points about the song "El Rey" from the given text
Given this text, who was Mclaren's number-one driver in 1988
Is an avocado a fruit or a vegetable?
Which sport is similar to baseball?
When Joan of Arc was beatified in the famous Notre Dame cathedral in Paris?
Who were the members of England's men's football World Cup winning team in 1966?
Classify each activity as athletic or academic: reading, running, studying, jumping, writing, sprinting
Give me a list of Premier League winners in the last 5 years.
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Bitter, Cord
Which social media platform is the best?
how much traffic actually is drawn to this page and how long to user spend reading and hovering over this paragraph? What regions around the world does this traffic stem from?
What is the tallest tree in the world
How did the American Foxhound originate?
What is the fourth album from The Tragically Hip?
What is the plot of the movie going wild
What does S3 stands for?
Can 4 working days a week achieve same result as 5 working days a week?
Who is the most successful driver in Formula 1 history?
What is a Hummum
Can someone drive on Black Bear Road all year?
Should I buy a tesla model 3 or tesla model y?
From the passage provided, extract the states that encompass South India. Separate them with a comma.
Why Phuket is so famous
What are the top 10 television dramas of all time
What is the best selling book in history?
what is Kubernetes?
What is MACRO-economics?
Is running a healthy sport?
What years did the Patriots win a Super Bowl?
Categorize these car models as either 'fully electric', 'hybrid', 'plug-in', 'gasoline': Toyota Camry 2017 SE, Tesla Model 3, Toyota Prius, 2022 Ford Escape Plug-In Hybrid, Rivian
Name a Christopher Nolan movie that was remade into an Indian movie.
When does tropical cyclone season occur in the Southern Hemisphere?
A group of friends and putting together a D&D group and would like a balance of ranged and melee character classes. Here are the classes they are considering:  Ranger, Rogue, Fighter, Barbarian, Monk, Warlock, Paladin, and Wizard. Please create a dot point list of Ranged and Melee classes in alphabetical order, so that I can share that with my friends.
Which moons of Saturn did Pioneer 11 encounter and image?
What is Intermittent Fasting?
what is quantum computer?
Who wrote the music for the ballets Firebird and Rites of Spring
What is MBB and what does it stand for?
Why questions boost creativity during brainstorming sessions
Which epic poem discussed the Trojan Horse?
Why should you get out of your comfort zone?
in which language does God Jul mean happy Xmas
What are some well known movies with Leonardo DiCaprio?
Name some Japanese words that describe various Japanese art forms.
Who does Machiavelli believe exemplifies the characteristics of a true prince in The Prince, and why does he hold this belief?
Give me a proof that the square root of 2 is irrational
what is cricket and why is it popular in Asian countries?
Who is the greatest NBA player of all time?
Describe a plan for training to compete in a long distance gravel cycling event, including nutrition, preparation, and recovery requirements. Your plan should include a timeline and be relevant to someone who works a full time job.
Did Neo take the blue pill or the red pill?
What’s the difference between Spark Streaming and Spark Structured Streaming? What should I use?
Give me a list of the most interesting moons in our solar system
Extract names of all weapons mentioned in the paragraph below:
Why does Israel offer huge discounts to Chicago Booth students' spring break trips?
When was the first episode of the TV show, The X-Files?
Give me a list of adjectives that describe the ideal friend.
What is Chromosomal Deletion Syndrome?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Atom, Hank Pym
Who shot Mr. Burns on the Simpsons?
What is a p-value in statistics?
Based on this paragraph from Wikipedia, what's the origin of the word Kubernetes?
Why is the Cave of the Crystals or Giant Crystal Cave closed to the public?
What is a bokoblin?
Can you summarize Catharine of Bourbon’s marriage-related history?
I'm considering buying football boots. How do I know which one to buy?
Give me an overview of the rivalry between the Celtics and Lakers.
How many members will NATO have once Finland and Sweden join the organization?
list Favorite Toddler movies in 2023
List the names of the people mentioned in the text provided.
Given a reference text about the Kaziranga Elephant Festival, tell me who organizes it.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Igil, Koudi
What was the football team that played at the University of Oregon in 1949?
Please propose an argument to convince my mother that she increases the amount of money that I get every month during my studies. I think the current amount is too low.
Tell me a number of ways that one could learn about data science
Name a few popular racquet sports
Which are main characters in Harry potter
Classify which cat breeds into long-haired and short-haired breeds:  Siamese, Maine Coon, Norwegian Forest Cat, Russian Blue, British Shorthair, Persian, Ragdoll, Himalayan, Burman
Give me a list of five languages which I should make my kids learn.
In geology, what are the main classification for rocks?
Q: What should I do with hand sanitizer on the FDA's list of hand sanitizers that consumers should not use?
Which is better - skiing or snowboarding
What are the key functions of FDIC?
India's Last 10 Prime Ministers
What is the size of the Eiffel Tower?
What category do these items belong to:
- Apple
- Pear
- Banana
- Orange
- Pineapple
- Guava

The possible categories are: Fruits, Vegetables, Minerals.
Where was poutine invented?
How many legs has octopus?
What percentage of Manewra's population work for the government?
Extract a name of a water passage that separates Egypt form Jordan and Saudi Arabia
What do they call soccer in the rest of the world, than United States?
What is the EU compensation regulation EU261 for cancelled flights?
Where is Jordan Spieth from?
What is the Great American Novel?
Which of the star signs are earth signs?
Can someone drive a bicycle on this road?
What are the names of the general purpose registers in the x86-64 architecture?
What are some good coffee shops in the Cambridge, Massachusetts area?
From the passage provided, extract when Susanna started as a principal.
I want you to break these emotions down into happy and sad groups: Upset, Joyful, Elated, Grief, Amused, Upbeat and Melancholy.
Provide a three sentence summary about the population of Kuçova.
How many Indian princely states were united by Sardar Patel during 1947-1949
Given a reference text about "Ghouli" tell me what happens in the episode.
Classify each of the following on the basis of text (alphabetically) or numbers (numerically) - Bangalore, 265, Apple, 10, Bag, 49.
Tell me whether these are Indian states or not: Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Chennai, Haryana, Delhi
Give me a bulleted list of the last eight female Olympians to win the 200m freestyle.
Name two cabinet members mentioned in the following paragraph.  Provide these as a bulleted list in order of appearance.
What movie received the most nominations for the 70th Academy Awards?
What is the capital of Telangana?
What is Sinigang?
What is the name of the woman D'Artagnan falls in love with ?
Using the passage, summarise the key events of Jalal Talabani's career as a bullet point list
how to use toothpaste creatively
"Big Bang": what does it mean?
What is the minimum amount of points a player needs to score to win a badminton match?
What is the Memorial Recreation Park and where is it located
What is a to-do list?
What is Oz?
From the passage, note down the components of Mortgage.
Describe the relationship between the Trustor and Trustee
What is the benefit of cinnamon
What is Photosynthesis
What are the tennis ball made of?
Classify each of the following as a new world or old world crop: Potato, Corn, Tomato, Wheat, Oat, Cacao, Apple, Olive
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Boomwhacker, Ukelin
What are some uses of Styrofoam?
I'm confused if I should join a data science bootcamp or do an online course. The following are some reasons. Can you segregate based on the choice I have to make?

easier to drop out if you dont like it
hands on learning
group discussions
option to do multiple courses
access to mentors
detailed deep dive into multiple topics
lesser time investment
networking opportunities
financially feasible
Which of these artists can be considered yacht rock? Hall and Oates, Journey, the Doobie Brothers, Prince, the Artist formerly known as Prince, Foghat, The Grateful Dead, the Little River Band, Christopher Cross, Van Halen, Fleetwood Mac, Kenny Loggins, Twisted Sister, Toto.
Eric Arthur Blaire was the real name of which author
List the founders of Twitter from the above passage in a comma separated format.
Polly, a 51-year-old female, visits your fitness facility. She is dissatisfied with her body and is responding to a series of ads your facility uses to attract people interested in weight loss. What new behaviors and habits could she adopt to optimize weight control?
I am trying to book a flight from Singapore to Sydney, what shall I do if the flight is too expensive?
How do I get in shape?
What is a term deposit?
What are some board games that involve strategy?
What kind of bacteria is Bifidobacterium thermacidophilum
How do you potty train your bunny?
Name five popular large dog breeds
What programming language should I learn?
Does Lego release any sets with tanks?
Write an email to the city of Berkeley requesting a refund for basketball camp because it was boring.
What are some weight loss tips?
Who is the only US president elected from Pennsylvania?
What is the population of Miramar?
List some of the extinct houses in the series "A Song of Ice and Fire."
What are the various methods to offer support for the improvement of the traditionally underprivileged sections of the society?
What's Botola Pro ?
How strong was the Kent earthquake
Is Cartesian dualism correct ?
Should heritage trees in Palo Alto be protected once they become a danger to people and homes?
Give me a list of the top five most followed people on Instagram, along with their number of followers.
Tell me if these are toppings for pizza: pepperoni, cheese, sausage, peppers, onions, bacon, mushrooms, pineapple
Identify which teams in the following list are hockey teams: Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings, Florida Panthers, Montreal Canadiens, New England Patriots, Pittsburgh Pirates, new York Yankees, Texas Rangers, Manchester United, Ottawa Senators, Tampa Bay Lightning, Toronto Maple Leafs, Chelsea, Liverpool FC, Los Angeles Lakers, Toronto Raptors, Arizona Coyotes, Chicago Blackhawks, Colorado Avalanche, Dallas Stars, Minnesota Wild, Pittsburgh Steelers
Which company is owned by Bill Gates
Have you heard of Yandovy or Яндовы?
Who is Joëlle Boutin?
I'm making a meal, please tell me which ingredients are fruits, vegetables, grains and meats. Lettuce, tomato, avocado, rice, beef, onion, garlic, cilantro.
Can airplanes land in windy conditions?
What is conspicuous consumption?
Classify the below Noble prize winners based on the country they are from.
Rabindranath Tagore, Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman, Amartya Kumar Sen, Joseph John Thomson, Ernest Rutherford, Niels Bohr
Is Killing is Sin ? Is it ture
Steps to create a chatbot
What is the capital of Arkansas?
Battles between England and Scotland
Which is a species of fish? Steelhead or Metalhead
Given a reference text about Derby Museum and Art Gallery, tell me when the it was established and what the gallery contains.
What instrument plays the part of the duck in the musical composition, "Peter and the Wolf"
Extract the total annual return of S&P500 over the last 10 years, and place them in the format {Source} - {Percentage}
What is an audible?
Tell me whether these are countries or cities: Sweden, Bangalore, Panama, Pakistan, Lebanon, Los Angeles
Extract from the text the Australian city on which the show Bluey is inspired
Who is the toughest teenage mutant ninja turtle?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ghatam, Monochord
What is the origin of orange wine?
Give me a few ways that I could travel from Munich to Rome and list the advantages and disadvantages for each.
Who is called Iron Man of India and why?
Write a movie script about a dystopian past where intelligent machines have evolved to fight against humanity. A younger human challenges the ways of the elders and transforms into a cyborg to fight the machines.
Who is the white rapper that sings 'Thrift Shop'?
Is brazilian jiu jitsu good for self defense?
What is Swift?
Why is Lafayette, California such an appealing place to live?
Extract the names of the playable characters in Street Fighter II from the passage, and list them out separated by a comma.
What does Touch Typing refer to?
What are the different types of art?
Q: What do I do if I get a rash or other reaction to hand sanitizer? What do I do if I have been exposed to contaminated hand sanitizer?
What dishes can we eat as a Vegan?
In a website browser address bar, what does “www” stand for?
Given the reference text below about Larry Bird, tell me where he was born, what he did for a living, and who his greatest professional rival was.
What is the Willow Project? What is it's significance an how could this change the world we live in?
Identify from this list who are characters from The Hunger Games book series: Katniss Everdeen, Benedict Cumberbatch, Effie Trinket, Benadryl Cucumberpants, Cornelius Snow, Peeta Mellark, Bendydoo Calliopeplayer, Haymitch Abernathy, Seneca Crane, Ballyoop Cockadoodle
What is Victoria González's westling pedigree?
What is a group of bunnies called?
Write a story about a budding romance between two people. Talk about their going on an adventure together where they sneak into a fancy garden in Washington DC and get into just the right amount of trouble.
I have some vermouth and bitters. What cocktails can I make with those ingredients?
List different ways in which Nuclear power can be obtained based on the passage.
Which of these colors are primary colors?
Given a reference text about the Build Back Better Plan, what are the 3 parts that make up the plan?
Classify each of the following countries as either democratic or authoritarian: USA, Russia, China, Sweden, UK.
What are the best investments ideas?
Give me a list of the last five european golden boots winner.
Why is Andrew Jackson criticized for racial policies?
Classify each of the following universities as being in the ACC or SEC: Ole Miss, LSU, FSU, Clemson, UGA, Miami
Which are the top 3 countries I should visit in South East Asia or ASEAN?
Classify each instrument as a woodwind, string, brass, or percussion: trumpet, violin, oboe, french horn, bassoon, cymbal, cello, clarinet, trombone, triangle, piccolo, flute, harp, tuba, snare drum
Given the paragraph about Independence Day, the Thirteen Colonies were not free from which Monarch?
Who explored New World?
Given this paragraph about Lady Gaga, which album did "Bloody Mary" appear on?
What is a humility?
Was Thanos right ?
How do I get to Juneau, Alaska?
Write about a peculiar dream you have had
Why does sand get firmer when it is wet?
Extract the ways to spell "Muscovy duck" using the sample as a reference, and place them in a list.
What is the largest city in North America?
What are 5 things to do in Taveuni, Fiji?
Why are dogs called dogs?
Which is a species of fish? Dolphin or Dolphin fish
What is the most popular sport in Canada?
Why did the Sahara experience a period of rapid desertification?
What's changed and unchanged for IKEA pencils through the years?
What is a block chain?
What is the best way to understand event based data?
Why did the Soviet Union collapse?
What is the Jones-Connally Act?
Running a business is tough and there will always be problems in the market.  Make the case to a skeptical colleague as to why private sector managers should devote attention and energy to being a steward of the institutions of capitalism. Please include citations for Jonathan Haidt.
What is GMROI?
What's loquat fruit and where does it originate from?
Where can I go to find out where my polling place is in Wisconsin so that I know where I can vote?
What high school did Washington Governer Jay Inslee attend?
Based on the reference text, what were the main countries and alliances of World War II?
Classify each of the following as either a real or a fictional characters: professor Dumbledore, Mahatma Gandhi, King Arthur, captain Kirk, Luke skywalker, Julius Caesar
best ways to search google
Classify each of the following European countries as either members of the European Union or non-members of the European Union: Spain, Albania, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Romania, Germany.
Extract the names of the Formula One teams Verstappen was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Booker Prize 2021 was given to Damon Galgut for
Is Scala a good programming language?
From the provided description of the cheesemaking process, list the ingredients required to make cheese.
Which of these animals typically travel through the air and which travel through the water: whale, shark, eagle, sea turtle, hummingbird, blue jay, octopus, and robin.
Make an argument for making buses free to ride in cities.
When is Original Joe's Day in San Francisco?
What is the major source of income in Ethiopia and why its important?
Give me some tips for cooking the best bolognese sauce.
Which first indian movie won oscars and what category
What do to if your cat starts drooling excessively?
What are the benefits of the public cloud
What are three mammals found within San Mateo County?
Based on the paragraph below, name some authors outside of Latin America who employ magical realism in their work.
Will immunity increase when you have pets like Dogs/Cats?
What is Spot rate in finance?
Why do people travel to Puerto Rico?
What is the Gospel in the context of the Christian faith?
How do you? How do you plant flowers
Extract out some details about Hair of the Dog Brewing Company brewery from given paragraph
Who is Brendon Small?
Extract the years in which Ayrton Senna da Silva won the Formula One World Drivers' Championship and list them using bullets.
How old is the Greek language?
From the passage provided, extract the date when Lincoln was assasinated
Extract the list of European Union member countries
What kind of dog is a Bernedoodle?
Which three players have the most Masters Victories?
Why do people like playing video games?
Can you name a few Tom Cruise Movies?
Who developed the Black Swan theory?
What are the earliest records of dried fruits in history?
Give me some ideas for party games at a child's birthday.
Who was responsible for creating Skynet?
how to be happy everyday?
Name the four members of the Beatles.
Write a self introduction for a person named Cassie when speaking to a recruiter.
Extract a list of rivalries with the Detroit Lions in bulleted form, sorted alphabetically.
What type of music do U2 make?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Tenor violin, Bass flute
Who first recorded the weather?
What has more caffeine between Coffee and Tea
What and how should you feed your baby?
In golf, what is the proper technique when hitting a bunker shot? Assume the bunker is green adjacent.
Why is the primary form of travel in the United States personal vehicle rather than by mass transit?
If you have one of the following issues, should you consult a doctor, a lawyer, or a plumber: a leaky faucet, a persistent cough, a small claims court summons, a torn meniscus, a urinary tract infection, a broken toilet, a federal indictment, or a search warrant from the FBI.
Who are the best hitters in major league baseball I've never seen?
Given a reference text about the Battle of Thermopylae, tell me when the battle was fought, who the battle was between, how many Greek and Persian forces there were, how the Persian army was able to flank the Greek forces and who won the battle?
Name five teams in the German Bundesliga.
I want to watch a movie that won the Oscar for best picture. Here are my choices: Moonlight, Wizard of Oz, Arrival, Elvis, Everything Everywhere All at Once, Chicago, Gone with the Wind, Top Gun. What should I choose?
How much sleep should I get per night?
Should you buy a new or a used car?
What is the Pandemis corylana
will AI replace my jobs
What are the four main types of debt securities?
Why do you want to keep customers happy?
Give me a list of 5 neglected tropical diseases
What is wheat?
What is the fastest time control chess?
Why do the San Francisco 49ers play in Santa Clara, California?
List the ingredients and step by step instructions to make a glass of AMF.
Why did the chicken cross the road?
How many species of Stingrays are there?
whats the total number of US senator?
Why was Michael Jackson the "King of Pop"?
What are the top nominated films to the Academy Awards in 2023?
What is better a mac or a PC?
which are the must-visit places in India?
I am an odd number and if you take away a letter, I become even. What number am I?
What is the potential hydrogen of water?
What is the Nehemiah Hubbard House
What is cross-country skiing?
How you can loose fat
What are common titles for the executives of large companies?
What is longer, 5 pounds or 10 kilograms?
Name the top 10 greatest rapper of all time
Given this reference text about the history of statistics, what was the earliest publican of writing on statistics?
Why are dogs better than cats for a person's physical health?
What is economics?
What is the difference between laser cutting and 3D printing?
Why boys are best over girls
Give me a summary of the paragraph in your own words and it should be short
Can you write me a summary on this page then tell me who and how much traffic is drawn to this page from which regions around the world?
per this reference text about Delaware Route 16, how many times does the road change between being a divided highway and undivided?
Who won the 1998-99 UEFA Champions League?
Why education is so important apart from career opportunity
Tell me whether these sea animals are fish or mammals: blue whale, beluga whale, manatee, dolphin, orca, humpback whale, whale shark, sea lion, walrus, seal, white tip shark, red tail shark, great white shark, guppy, danio, swordtail, tetra, cichlid, tuna, salmon, trout, puffer fish
List five happy words
Please provide a bulleted list of the wildfire history that have affected the Santa Barbara area.
From this summary of Captain Ginyu's role in the series Dragon Ball, how many times did Captain Ginyu switch bodies?
Who are the best rappers in history?
Why Bangalore is so popular
Tell me a joke
Extract the names of the Planet Earth series, and separate them with a comma.
From the passage provided, extract the year where C++ was standardized
From the text provided, extract the list of styles found on Budapest architecture. Separate them with a semi-colon.
Where was Samuel Loew born?
Given these paragraphs about a well-known Scottish University of some import, tell me specific details about when and where it was founded, what it's most well known for, and who are some of its most famous alumni.
who is the worlds most popular cricketer?
Name some birds that are commonly observed in Berkeley, CA.
What kind of salt should I use while cooking?
Extract the family name of the fungus Clitocybe subcordispora.
What is the best food?
Who did Donald's grandfather body guard for?
Classify the following as living things and non-living things: Car, Desk, Parrot, Cheetah, Phone
Classify each of the following as either a country or a continent: Africa, North America, Asia, South America, Asia, China, Argentina, Canada, Mexico, Japan, United States of America
You have been placed in the position of supporting the 2010 Supreme Court decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission.  Please develop your position into a one-page position paper (12-point font, single spaced).
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Microraptor, Whale
Given a reference text about the 35th Filipino Academy of Movie Arts and Sciences Awards Night, tell me who won the best actor award.
Given this paragraph about Eric Clapton, what solo accomplishments help rank him as one of the most influential guitarists of all time?
Define Part of Speech
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Oakheart?
How much sleep is too much?
Given this paragraph about Duchess Auguste of Württemberg, what happened to personal life?
What makes a good teacher?
List down some facts about Shandao temple using given passage as a reference
what is Modern Talking?
Give me a bulleted list of the different ways coffee can be brewed.
What is IMAP?
From the text, how long after the events of Return of the Jedi is the Mandalorian series set?  Convert years into months, and use letters to spell out the answer.
Extract the majors of Suzanne Collins from the text.  Separate them with a comma.
Give me a bulleted list of ways I can prank my friends on April fools day
Give me a list of the last 10 mens college hockey champions.
How many cards are there is a standard deck of cards ?
List a few female comedians that have Netflix specials
Did the Grateful Dead play at the original Woodstock concert?
From the passage identify the different types of mortality encompassed by Child mortality. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What are 6 different reasons to go on vacation?
Why is the Bay Area football team called the 49ers?
Given a reference text about multiple myeloma, tell me the risk factors and the cause of the disease.
Who was On the Point of Death directed by, given the following information?
Why is Cricket popular in India?
How many times Max Verstappen won the F1 Championship ?
What is an aurora?
What is linear programming and how to solve?
Which is a species of fish? Icefish or Iceberg
What are the different ways in which a batsman in cricket can be dismissed
Given the reference text about a towboat, how does the boat work?
What is your thought on children having smart phones?
Who was the Father of Elizabeth II ?
How food insecurity can lead to obesity. How can teachers help alleviate food insecurity if they identify this problem in children’s families?
Are you ever too old for anything?
What is Gettysburg College?
Classify each of the following as either DC or Marvel characters: Superman, Mickey Mouse, Thor,  Batwoman, Gamora, Scarlet Witch, Superman, Wonder Woman, Homer Simpson, Falcon, Moon Girl
Classify these foods as either "italian", "french", "mexican" or "other". Crepes Suzette, Parmigiana di melanzane, La paella de marisco, Tahchin, Tacos al pastor, Soupe à l'oignon, Enchiladas, Pappardelle al ragù.
What begins with the letter "e" and only contains one letter?
How many months have less than 31 days?
How many seasons was Jeff Fisher the head coach of the Titans while they were not in Tennessee?
What is gravity?
Write a brief paragraph of the benefits of attending Arizona State University
When is the best time to transplant bearded iris?
Imagine you are at the beach in Hawaii at sunset time. Describe what you see, smell and hear as you relax on a beach chair.
Which of these would you not wear on a hot summer day? Sweatshirt, t-shirt, shorts, tank top, hat, wool coat, leather trousers, crop top.
Did the Bisons have a winning season in 1958?
What is the best way to handle depression
Give me a bulleted list of first person shooter games on PS4
From the given paragraph, extract the industry sector and the corresponding percentage of GDP in the format {Industry sector} - {Percentage} and list them using bullets
Please provide some resources that will help me think through the process of creating an online course.
Note down some details about Munda Airport from the given text
In the x86-64 architecture, how can the operating system specify which pages cannot contain executable code?
Why do people put ICE as a contact in their cell phone?
Where is Chiria
Who wrote Les Miserable
What is life like living underwater?
Given this paragraph about Freddie Mercury, where was his last performance with Queen.
Based on the provided text, how many awards did the book "The Killing Jar" win and what year were they awarded?
Make me a list of give cocktails made using vodka, include any other ingredients required.
Tell me whether these are flowers or trees: lily, oak, rose, pine, marigold, hickory, dahlia, spruce
Give me a list of great sci-fi
What is API abuse?
Brainstorm a list of five different animals that you could find on a farm
List down some facts regarding the Republican Party of Arkansas from given text
Conference of Parties (COP) is the supreme body of?
Do aliens exist?
What are your views on parenting?
Classify each of the following as edible or not edible: hamburger, toast, rubber, leather, pizza, plastic
Who was the guitarist and drummer of The Verve?
Who is the most powerful person in the world?
What are some tips that kids could use to learn the lines of a musical school play? Write them as if they are narrated by an elementary school student.
What is India famous for?
Who was Edmund Converse Pierce II?
What are the best types of pets for a family with kids?
I want to become a pro MMA fighter. How can I go about doing so?
Give me a list of the last 5 NBA championship teams
What is Perseverance doing on Mars?
Why are the Georgia Bulldogs back to back National Champions in Football?
Given a reference text about Sourcefire, what company acquired it and how much was it acquired for?
Name the spyware used by Israel to hack Whatsapp?
Give me a list of Australian Capital cities
I’m walking to work and I’d like to carry helpful things in my backpack for a big presentation. Which of these should I pack: rotary telephone, eighty inch monitor, laptop,  notepad, beer keg, pen.
Steps to choose right colour for occasion
Select the odd word from this list and explain why you chose it
Galaxy S23
Milky Way
Pinwheel Galaxy
Andromeda Galaxy
Sombrero Galaxy
What’s the difference between Delta Live Tables and Workflows?
What are some ways you can pop a balloon?
Is having a board of directors important
List all the important milestone in chronological order
What makes us happy ?
Given the reference text about "The New Deal", what are the "3 R's" historians refer to about the program.
Which episodes of season two of Game of Thrones did David Nutter direct?
How are odds different from probability?
Which was the first film to reach he billion-dollar mark?
How many children did Louis Pasteur have, and how many died of typhoid fever?
Who did Outcault paint electric light displays for?
are these seas or oceans?
atlantic
indian
caspian
red
arabian
pacific
baltic
yellow
southern
Is it wrong to split the infinitive?
What is the Masters Tournament?
What are some common errors when using Kafka with Spark?
What is FedRAMP?
Who are the best chess players of all time?
What was the final name of Great Northern in this passage
What are the best complex board games for two players?
What are 5 easy dinner ideas that kids will like?
Best place to visit in the world
What natural disaster transports Dorothy to Oz in the Wizard of Oz?
What is the style of play for Zlatan Ibrahimović?
What’s the easiest coffee brewing method?
When does baby start crawling?
Which astronomer is name-dropped in "Bohemian Rhapsody?"
Extract from the following passage, the periods of time does sunrise refer to.
From the passage note down the years when global recession happened. List the results in comma separated format.
Name the mathematicians whose stories are the focus of the book Hidden Figures
How many Silver Star awards did James Frederick Moriarty receive?
I am planning to buy a bicycle; can u advise what to look out for when buying?
What are four different recipes that you can make with Brussels Sprouts?
Who is Bon Jovi
What are the best ramen places to eat in San Mateo, CA?
Show me general reviews received for game Meat Puppet using given text as a reference
I'm confused as to which of these food staples have gluten and which are gluten-free. From this list can you tell me which is which: Pasta, rice, potatoes, noodles and bread.
Remove the last names of all people in this passage
Extract all the metrics used to measure the performance of IPSTAR from the following paragraph. Present the results in a list separated by commas.
Give me a list of five of the most widely known recording artists/bands of all time, across all genres of music.
Why did the San Francisco 49ers lose some fans in the mid-2000s?
From the passage provided, extract the launch date and current distance from Earth in miles of Voyager 1.
Given the paragraph is Strip the most famous hotel in Las Vegas?
What are the words of House Ambrose?
Describe 5 different uses for a stick that is 2 feet long and 1 inch in diameter.
Who came in first place in Formula One the last ten years?
What achievements did Cade Cunningham receive during his first year in the NBA based on the provided paragraph?
Extract the main actors and actresses who played in the show Parks and Recreation.
Why I want to visit Chicago
What is retail banking?
Give me a one line summary of the story below: 

A long long time ago the Queen of Odisha heard that there was a master stone sculptor who made such stunning statues of the gods that people would weep from happiness at the beauty of the statues if they saw them. One summer day, while resting indolently with the King in the main hall of the royal palace, the Queen suddenly had a thought. "How nice it would be, King, if we could build some beautiful statutes of Lord Jagannath so that the people can come worship Jagannath, Balabhadra, and Subadhra. What do you think?" 

The King thought for a few minutes, and then nodded in agreement. "What do you have in mind, my Queen?" And so, soon the stone sculptor was summoned to appear before the Court for an appointment to build in his way the statutes of the gods. Soon the monsoon season started and the sculptor appeared in front of the court, awaiting his appointment. He was a humble man from the mountainous regions of Odisha. Even at his best-dressed, one couldn't help but notice his rough hands, and the small sprinkling of dust that seemed ever present in his hair. 

The King and Queen graciously waited as the sculptor bowed and then asked "Your majesties, what can I do for you?" The Queen leaned forward in her throne and her voice rang out in the court "We have heard, o Master Sculptor, of your skills from people far and wide across the Kingdom. We dream of having you put your skills to use to build beautiful statues that will represent Lord Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balabhadra for our people to worship."

The sculptor was silent. As his silence extended, ministers of the court began to feel restless. "Speak up! How can you be silent when the Queen graces you so!" But still, the sculptor was silent. 

The King and Queen sat patiently in their thrones as they waited for the sculptor to respond. Perhaps the enormity of the task was too much. Perhaps, the sculptor was thinking of what he should ask for in return. Or even more, perhaps, the sculptor was awed and honored by the request. 

At last, as the shadows from the late afternoon sun began to stretch across the floors of the hall, the sculptor shifted his weight, and opened his mouth to speak. "Your majesties, you grace me with such a request, I cannot help but oblige. It is an honor." At this, the Queen sat as straight as a rod, listening for the words that would come next. "But, I can do this on one condition only. I will work in a closed hall, where none may enter - regardless of whether they can hear me working or otherwise. None may enter until I open the doors from within and proclaim to all that the statues are completed."

The ministers gasped - what a strange request from this man. Was he a fool? What if he just slept and ate and didn't do any work? How could the King and Queen trust that he would do the work he was promising to do? The Queen looked on thoughtfully. She glanced at the King, and it seemed to her that he agreed on this condition without reservation. She looked at the sculptor and then nodded her assent. "We decree that you shall build these statues in a hall set aside, into which no one shall enter until your work is complete and you proclaim that to us after opening the doors of the hall from within."
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Albertonectes, African forest elephant
What are some horror movies from 1987?
Name some of the movies where Johnson acted in and the years in which the movies were released.
How is the climate in Chicago IL
What is the objective of a batter in the sport of baseball?
Which houseplants are the most popular?
What does Pinot Noir mean?
Who built Sigiriya fortress in Sri Lanka?
What would be some useful random items to help you on an island if you were stranded
What are drop bears?
What is Scottsdale, Arizona USA known for?
What are the benefits of working with a coach?
What is the Daisy Bates House
With the given passage as a reference, write some details about Popelogan River
How many episodes of the first season of Game of Thrones did Daniel Minahan direct?
Given a reference text about the Osterville Baptist Church, tell me why its steeple was rebuilt and when it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Who betrayed Jesus to the Romans
Why is the sky blue?
What is a subprocessor for purposes of data privacy laws?
Where can you find the best bagel in the world?
Why are Dr. Seuss books so good?
Which one is best for youtube creator gorpro or DJI Osmo pocket 2
What is the name of the professional football team in Colorado?
Where is the best place to view the Northern Lights in Europe?
Is Anthology 3 the White Album
What is the stock market?
What is Forest Park (Springfield, MA)?
Classify each of the following as either a lepton or a hadron: electron, proton, neutron, pi meson, electron neutrino, muon neutrino, tau neutrino.
Who is the fastest person on earth?
Many important hominid fossils have been found in Tanzania, such as 6-million-year-old Pliocene hominid fossils. The genus Australopithecus ranged across Africa between 4 and 2 million years ago, and the oldest remains of the genus Homo are found near Lake Olduvai. Following the rise of Homo erectus 1.8 million years ago, humanity spread all over the Old World, and later in the New World and Australia under the species Homo sapiens. H. sapiens also overtook Africa and absorbed the older species of humanity. Later in the Stone and Bronze Age, prehistoric migrations into Tanzania included Southern Cushitic speakers who moved south from present-day Ethiopia; Eastern Cushitic people who moved into Tanzania from north of Lake Turkana about 2,000 and 4,000 years ago; and the Southern Nilotes, including the Datoog, who originated from the present-day South Sudan–Ethiopia border region between 2,900 and 2,400 years ago.: page 18  These movements took place at about the same time as the settlement of the Mashariki Bantu from West Africa in the Lake Victoria and Lake Tanganyika areas. They subsequently migrated across the rest of Tanzania between 2,300 and 1,700 years ago.
How to optimize space usage in garage
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Frame drum, Citole
what is meetup group
Extract the names of the teams Alexandra Oquendo was a part of from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution.
List the agricultural reasons why sheep were domesticated
What is Dataproc?
What are the top 5 best movies ever made?
What does the Atomic Energy Research Establishment School do
According to the passage, mention some of Taylor’s early albums.
Given a reference about the creation of the UFC, tell me the member of the Gracie family  who co-created the UFC and the city they hosted the first UFC event.
Write a short poem about the relevance of AI in the workplace in the style of Edgar Allan Poe's The Raven.
Name a good wood for a beginning wood carving project?
What are some of the best TV shows on HBO?
What is telnet?
Where did Rock and Roll come from?
How do people travel?
Please give me a bulleted list of men's Roland Garros champions of the last 5 years.
In what city was Titanium first discovered?
How many times have the Boston Celtics won the NBA championship?
List some of the television gameshows that Bob Stewart created, co-created, and/or produced.
Given this paragraph, which two US interstates were not originally continuous? Have they now been made continuous?
Given this paragraph about Platylesches Robustus, what type of insect is it and how many countries can it be found?
Describe the main areas of assembly in an automotive factory.
When thinking about ways to describe communications, which of these adjectives describes verbosity, and which describe communication which is concise. Wordy, succinct, prattling, effusive, abridged, babbling.
What is the source or cause of the Sun’s light?
Best resorts in Maldives
How do Nietzsche and Haraway critique the concept of scientific knowledge and its pursuit of objectivity? How do they use the ideas of "the god-trick" and "pride" to explain the faults in scientific discoveries?
I'm always confused while segregating the trash. Could you help me identify what should go where? I have to throw these items: Soda Can, Paper Napkin, and Coffee Cup.
how many limbs are in yoga
In the summary below of episode 158 of the series Black Clover, how did the Spade army lose?
How Should I train my dog?
What are the words of House Smallwood?
What should I think about when driving a car in a city?
Can I stream data directly into and from Delta tables?
Write a letter to my mum and dad detailing the reasons why they should buy me a pet tortoise
What is contemporary style of dance?
What is the CGRO that detects photons?
What language is spoken on the Aru Islands?
What are some strategies to survive in nature?
Choose the odd one out: Roger Federer, Roger Moore, Roger Binny
What type of bicycle should I buy?
How many times has Tiger Woods won the Masters tournament?
GIven this paragraph about American film director David Fincher, what are his reported upcoming projects.
Where are the oldest oak trees in Central America?
Please write a summary of the kinds of vehicles that are used for ambulances.
Summarize The Innovator's Dilemma in a few sentence
By what percentage of vote margin did Ralph Northam win over Aneesh Chopra in the 2013 election for Governor of Virginia?
What U.S. President has left the White House to be re-elected again?
Write an e-mail to the office asking employees to clean their coffee mugs rather than leave them in the sink. It should be polite, but express some annoyance.
When do avalanches occur?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Carimbo, Gusle
When did California become a state?
Cyrus Mistry was the  6th Chairman of Tata Sons between between which years
What are all the dates that the Borneo visited Bencoolen written in the format Month Day Year?
How to make a dated home look modern?
Why are people eating eggs at Easter
Is Daft Punk still together?
Extract the text the name of the architect who designed the Josephine Shaw Lowell Memorial Fountain
where does the word dynamite come from?
What is Materialized View?
Why are plants green?
What flavors of girl scout cookies are available?
What is passive solar building design
How many times did Gordie Howe retire?
What's the relationship between aperture and shutter speed?
Tell me whether each of these is a drug or food: marijuana, fried chicken, alcohol, caffeine, sushi, mango
What are the things I can do to pass time while waiting for my appointment at a DMV office? I don’t want to use my phone.
What was the first Harry Bosch book called?
Which part of the United States is known as the "four corners" area?
From the passage provided, extract where the Fembe language is spoken.
Who were the United States Presidents?
What are some typical attributes of a tortoiseshell cat?
Which Targaryen conquered Westeros?
From the passage note down the various video categories on YouTube. List the results in comma separated format.
Write a motivating note to a friend who wants to lose weight
What genre did Taylor Swift begin her career in?
Name some of the well-known superheroes of Marvel Comics as per the passage.
Give a list of the parts of your physical appearance you would want to change?
Given a reference text about Tom Cruise, tell me when they were born and what they are famous for.
Please extract a list from this paragraph of the brain regions impacted by alcohol-related dementia and separate them using commas.
Which nation started the Arab Spring and what caused it?
Name some famous Bollywood actors?
In football, if touchdowns is the main way to get points, why can't the quarterback always throw the ball to the end zone every time?
What is man's best friend?
From the passage provided, extract the population of Bainbridge Island
Right data distribution strategy for Azure Synapse
Name some celebrities who have been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.
Who are the most famous English writers?
What is OAuth 2.0?
Why are so many movies and tv shows merely recycled stories from previously successful stories ?
Why do people prefer Windows over Linux?
Given this paragraph about Mass–energy equivalence, tell me what each part of the equation E=mc² stands for.
How many NBA championships does Lebron James have?
Why is Cricket so popular ?
Is Linux Unix?
Which of the following are considered hobbies: painting, hiking, rock climbing, peapod, bears, horse riding, chess, emails, clogs, board games, button, sewing, water bottle, keyboard, reading, soccer
How to make a cup of yummy chai?
Who was the best team in the NFL during the 1984 season?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ainu fiddle, Apito
Why are most plants green?
How does the federal government of the USA implement separation of powers?
Please provide a brief history of coffee
If you were a waiter and had a rude customer, what would you do?
Who was the coach for the Chicago Bulls when they won the NBA championship?
Who is god
From the passage provided, extract the most recent stable version of C#
What is the etymology of the word cookie?
In the paragraph below, what are the major sources of methane emissions?
How long is the Georgia State Route 49
Why does the US Federal Reserve raise interest rates?
Classify each of the following animals as ectothermic or endothermic: alligator, snake, frog, goat, human, gorilla
Write an friendly, convincing e-mail to my landlord asking whether I can get a dog.
Classify each of the following as old or young: baby, child, grandma, elderly, grandpa, octogenarian, infant
Based on the reference text, what were the main reasons homeless people from outside of San Francisco went to San Francisco?
Given this paragraph on Lady Gaga, tell me where she was born, the middle and high school she attended and how she considered herself in high school.
Write a letter to a home seller named Ms Johnson explaining why we are interested in purchasing her home. We are a person from Washington and a person from Colorado. Focus on the natural beauty of the home, the location, and the extra space for pottery and woodworking.
Write a review of your stay in a AirBnB in Rome that had a great location but poor amenities that is overall a neutral review
Extract the current cash rate from the following using the format: {x} percent

At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 3.60 per cent. It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to 3.50 per cent.
Global inflation remains very high. In headline terms it is moderating, although services price inflation remains elevated in many economies. It will be some time before inflation is back to target rates. The outlook for the global economy remains subdued, with below average growth expected this year and next.
The monthly CPI indicator suggests that inflation has peaked in Australia. Goods price inflation is expected to moderate over the months ahead due to both global developments and softer demand in Australia. Services price inflation remains high, with strong demand for some services over the summer. Rents are increasing at the fastest rate in some years, with vacancy rates low in many parts of the country. The central forecast is for inflation to decline this year and next, to be around 3 per cent in mid-2025. Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and it is important that this remains the case.
Growth in the Australian economy has slowed, with GDP increasing by 0.5 per cent in the December quarter and 2.7 per cent over the year. Growth over the next couple of years is expected to be below trend. Household consumption growth has slowed due to the tighter financial conditions and the outlook for housing construction has softened. In contrast, the outlook for business investment remains positive, with many businesses operating at a very high level of capacity utilisation.
Extract the foreign nationalities living in the city of Lugo, Spain, and list them using bullets in the format {Nationality} - {Percentage} separated by a comma.
Which two kings fought at the Battle of Kressenbrunn according to the text?
In which century was Denis Thériault born?
What is the city of Portsmouth in England famous for?
How many iron atoms are in a single molecule of the main component substance of ironsand?
Suggest an allocation to implement a three portfolio strategy as described in the text below
what is kangen water?
Give me an example of a screened subnet
Who is the best baseball player of all time?
What does percolate mean?
Given the following paragraph about a film, who directed "Our War"?
If Phil has three siblings, Margaret, Janis, and Louis then what are all are the names of Phil’s mother’s children?
Which of these could we use to feed our kid: apple, sandwich, beer, xanax, carrot, rock.
Classify the below persons based on whether they are kids of Shah Rukh Khan or Sanjay Dutt.
Suhana, Aryan, AbRam, Trishala, Iqra, Shahraan
Give me a list of the key elements of telecommunications developed over time
Why should kids do homework?
What is fossil fighter gameplay like?
What is the name of the first ten amendments to the Constitution?
What is the best way to travel to space?
Who finally conquered Constantinople?
How many Spitfire fighter aircraft remain airworthy
Based on the passage below, what do scientologists believe cause neuroses and mental problems?
What kind of food comprises Estonian cuisine?
Why did you take so long to get home last night?
Why should one travel the world?
Write a poem about a man named Chris who lives at the gym and fights monsters
Categorize these football teams as either "Spanish", "English", "German" or "Other". Manchester United, Arsenal, Ajax, Borussia Dortmund, Real Sociedad, Club Atlético River Plate
which of these are programming languages?

hindi
urdu
arabic
python
scala
rust
french
R
german
java
c
How many lifeboats did the Titanic have?
Is Ireland a good surf spot?
Given the following paragraph about the observation deck of the Burj Khalifa, what's offered on the 124th floor observation deck?
Describe the following poem: 

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, 
And sorry I could not travel both 
And be one traveler, long I stood 
And looked down one as far as I could 
To where it bent in the undergrowth; 

Then took the other, as just as fair, 
And having perhaps the better claim 
Because it was grassy and wanted wear, 
Though as for that the passing there 
Had worn them really about the same, 

And both that morning equally lay 
In leaves no step had trodden black. 
Oh, I kept the first for another day! 
Yet knowing how way leads on to way 
I doubted if I should ever come back. 

I shall be telling this with a sigh 
Somewhere ages and ages hence: 
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I, 
I took the one less traveled by, 
And that has made all the difference.
What were the top 3 best-selling PlayStation 2 video games?
What was the "X.Y.Z. fever"?
Suggest a road trip in Washington state
Tell me about the merger history of the Swiss bank UBS
Where is the Mall of America located?
Which of the following films came out in the 40s?
Who won six consecutive Wimbledon titles in the 1980s
What are some fun activities to do with my coworkers if we all work remotely?
What is "cycling" in ice hockey?
Which of the following vehicles are cars and which are trucks: Toyota Tacoma, Toyota Prius, Ford F-150, Honda Civic, Nissan Frontier,  Hyundai Accent, Chevrolet Corvette, Mazda Miata
From the passage provided, extract the shape of Milky way Galaxy
From the passage provided, extract the name of the Director of the Star Wars movie
How big is the Tibetan plateau?
Why do cloud providers use dedicated hardware for network and storage processing but not large enterprises for their private cloud?
Where is the best place to see the northern lights?
What are the 5 largest ski and snowboard resorts in North America?
Tell me whether the following people are athletes: LeBron James, Eileen Gu, Bjergsen, Rory McIlroy, Naomi Osaka.
What is the best way to approach a new cat?
How do you motivate and focus a team to exceed expectations during a terrible economic downturn?
Tell me who were the last three monarchs of the United Kingdom. Give it to me in a bulleted list with the format <name> (<start date> - <end date>)
What is the difference between interface and abstract class in Java?
Where is Muckle Water?
What is a bunk bed?
Give me a list of things to do in Washington, DC
Why you should have 2 incomes
What is a question mark?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the key events that happened in Kobe Bryant’s early life in time order, from earliest to the latest.
Who is the Jeff Bezos equivalent in China, and how much of net worth is him or her?
which of these words do not belong in the same category? peel, organic, fruit, yellow, mushy, crunchy.
What are some popular books about baseball?
How do the definitions of "first-degree relative" and "nuclear family" differ?
Why do you love travelling
How to take care of a horse?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cuica, Kokles
What characteristics are IPAs known for?
Who has been an announcer on the gameshow "The Price is Right"?
What are the top 5 rock bands of all time?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of how turist visit the falls even if they are used for hydroelectric power production.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tsymbaly, Yehu
Please classify the following items as either “waterproof” or “water absorbent”: umbrella, paper towel, sponge, raincoat, dish rag, car windshield.
What is a planet ?
Classify each of the following as either a city or a country:  Seoul, Shanghai, Sao Paolo, Singapore, Sweden.
What is my Chinese Zodiac sign (animal)?
From this list, tell me which are U.S. states: Oregon, Guam, St. Thomas, District of Columbia, Washington, New Mexico, Ohio, Montana, Puerto Rico
Based on this paragraph, why was Jake released from prison?
Do Texans have a Southern accent?
Based on the reference text, provide a one sentence overview of Dogecoin
What is electricity?
Why did House Targaryen leave Valyria?
What is it like living in Chicago, Illinois?
Which fruits are most often candied fruit?
What are the different RAID configurations?
You've bought a condominium in the city, your first home, with more rooms than your previous apartments. It doesn't have a garage or any yard. Which of the following items would be handy? A lawnmower, a bus pass, a security system, more bathroom towels, wall art, gardening tools, a washer and dryer set, a car
Approx. how many nurses were enrolled in World War 2?
Which movie do you like the most and why do you like it?
Who created the first piano?
What is the capital of Australia?
What is an ionic bond?
Does parallel universe really exist?
Describe to me in clear detail what the amazon logo looks like.
How many stories is the Empire State Building?
The story opens in Los Angeles in the 21st century, an unspecified number of years after a worldwide economic collapse. Los Angeles is no longer part of the United States since the federal government has ceded most of its power and territory to private organizations and entrepreneurs. Franchising, individual sovereignty, and private vehicles reign supreme. Mercenary armies compete for national defense contracts, while private security guards preserve the peace in sovereign gated housing developments.: 45  Highway companies compete to attract drivers to their roads,: 7  and all mail delivery is by hired courier.: 306  The remnants of government maintain authority only in isolated compounds, where they do tedious make-work that is, by and large, irrelevant to the society around them.: 176  Much of the world's territory has been carved up into sovereign enclaves known as Franchise-Organized Quasi-National Entities (FOQNEs),: 14  each run by its own big business franchise (such as "Mr. Lee's Greater Hong Kong", or the corporatized American Mafia), or various residential burbclaves (quasi-sovereign gated communities). In this future, American institutions are far different from those in the actual United States at the time the book was published; for example, a for-profit organization, the CIC, has evolved from the CIA's merger with the Library of Congress.: 22
What is a Limited company?
How do I open a bank account?
How many languages are there worldwide?
What skis should I buy?
I have got assigned a task to classify the following items as flammable or inflammable. Could you please help me with the classification? 
Here is the list of items: water, alcohol, gasoline, and orange juice
How much do clouds weigh?
What are the 3 laws of motion that Newton defined?
How many episodes in season one of Game of Thrones did Tim Van Patten direct?
Name some famous hindi film actors
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Riq, Surbahar
What is a computer network?
Who composed the theme song for the movie Marvin's Room?
Which is a bird or fish: Redhorse sucker, Red-necked grebe
Classify the following as an animal or plant. Polar bear, Oak Tree, Venus Flytrap, Shire Horse, Aloe vera, Golden retriever
Explain me the concept of "Karma" in Buddhism.
What is Cadoo?
Use the text to tell me what competitions Irina Aksyonova won or placed highly in.
Given these paragraphs about battery storage power stations, for how long a battery storage power station can output?
What are some common vegetables and fruits to put on tacos?
Where should I go hut skiing in Canada?
What is the name of the movie made by Ben Affleck and Matt Damon about the company Nike?
5 best source of water
What is the name of Special Agent Dana Scully's daughter?
What is the best way to recover from a shoulder SLAP tear?
What was the last year the Ford Pinto was manufactured
Who was Else Schmitz-Gohr
Is butter required to make cookies?
Provide a bulleted list of the controversies regarding Uber and a brief summary of each
Based on this passage, which years did the Patriots win the Super Bowl?
Are the following books fantasy or science fiction: Red Mars, The City We Became, The Three-Body Problem, the Harry Potter series, A Game of Thrones, Dune, The Fifth Season.
When was Bobby Moore born and when did he die?
Give a bulleted list of the main characteristic of metals listed in the passage
Who is the greatest tennis player of all time?
What color of light does the Haugsholmen Lighthouse emit?
Which is a species of fish? Swordtail or Excalibur
List the Pixar movies that have won Academy Awards.
Tell me whether the following are foods or beverages: coffee, water, corn, tea, rice, beef.
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Jaguar, GMC
What is the political system of Germany?
Given this paragraph about magnesium, what is the melting point of magnesium in celsius?
What's a famous music in Morocco
Where is Venezuela?
What is the oldest higher learning institution in the United States
Tell me whether these songs are performed by Nick Cave & The Bad Seeds or by Radiohead: Karma Police, The Good Son, The Mercy Seat, Creep, Planet Telex, Deanna, Pyramid Song, Airbag, Tupelo, Into My Arms, The National Anthem, Morning Bell, Lament, Idioteque, Red Right Hand, Straight To You
Is there a correlation between the milestones required between Data AI/ML and Intelligent Automation (RPA) value curve over time?
Given this paragraph about the history of Beijing, when did Beijing get the current name?
When is Thai New Year?
What is the Winged Victory monument?
What is Bayes theorem
The Khongjom Day is celebrated by which Indian state
How do people collaborate in a hybrid work environment?
Name a good sorting algorithm
What is the first step in teaching someone how to ski?
What is the difference between soccer(football) and American football?
Given a reference text about Easter eggs, tell me what they are, what they symbolize, and where they originated from?
Describe what it's like in Breckenridge, Colorado
Who are the last three french presidents ?
Why do my fingers hurt when playing guitar?
What is "the Scully effect?"
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ravanne, Sursingar
Are there rules that you should live by to be happy?
What are the teams in the NL Central Division in Major League Baseball?
What movie won best picture at the Oscars in 2023
Who gave the slogan of Quit India and Simon Go Back?
What type of YouTube Channel did Danla Bilic have?
where is khargone?
Write a diary entry for a dog that only likes one person that lives in the house on a day that their favorite person was gone all day.
Given this paragraph about Simon Bolivar, tell me when and where they were born, and what they are known for
Which is a species of fish? Tailor or Sailor
Tell me which of these countries has more than 1 billion population: Japan, Canada, United States, Russia, China, India
Why are Asian women’s fancy clothes so expensive
When is the World Teacher's Day celebrated?
What do economists study?
What was the 97th Rifle Division
In a section labeled "Isaac Asimov's Autobiography Volumes", from the given paragraph list the names of the volumes of Asimov's autobiography in chronological order with the following format {YEAR} - {TITLE} separated by newlines. Then, in a new section, list Janet Asimov's contributions in a section labeled "Asimov Biographies Janet Asimov Wrote or Contributed To" in the same format.
What should I do if my baby doesn't sleep in the night?
To which London club did Mycroft Holmes belong
Classify the following elements as metal or noble gas: Argon, Iron, Copper, Krypton, Neon, Silver, Thorium, Radon, Helium, Xenon, Erbium, Tin, Protactinium
What is photosynthesis?
Given this paragraph about the history of the marathon, who won the first official olympic marathon.
What happens if I let go of a helium balloon?
Identify the bird from the list: Racoon, Golden eagle, Anteater
Name a very famous family of composers & musicians of late baroque
Name the person  from Bangladesh who won Pulitzer Prize 2022
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Mangey, Tro
You come across a bear which is brown in color, has flat shoulders, and has large ears. What kind of bear is it?
Which of these sports are team sports: golf, basketball, boxing, running, cycling, baseball
How can I get from San Francisco airport to downtown San Francisco?
What was The Last Dance about?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sheker, Taishogoto
When going snowboarding what equipment will you need: Snowboard, boots, umbrella, computer, TV, gloves, bindings
Who is the youngest driver to win a Formula 1 race?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
5 Mistake to avoid in road trip
Why did Christopher Columbus think he had sailed to Asia instead of America? What maps did he have at his disposal?
Classify the below substances based on their natural physical state (Solid or Gas).
Methane, Gold, Silver, Platinum
Compare middle eastern music and western music
What is Summer House the TV show?
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: yard, metre
Write a brief passage arguing why beach volleyball is better than indoor volleyball.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Slynt?
What is the meaning of life?
What are the rules changes made to baseball this year?
What are different ways of data collection?
Tell me about the film The Catechism Cataclysm
Imagine that one day, a universally acknowledged property of time is bended. What is that property? Write about the new world under that setting.
why my laptop won't start?
Where did Bo Jackson attend college?
What bosses are there and what is their loot in Chapter four season 2 in Fortnite
What affects tiredness?
Where is Horsfieldia nervosa nervosa endemic to?
What is Russia-Ukraine Conflict?
Based on the following passage which dried fruit is sold the most?
What is a standing wheelchair?
What is the best way to travel from Philadelphia to Raleigh?
What career did  GeLing Yan have?
What is the best day for cold calling?
Classify the names of the Prime Ministers based on whether they belong to France or Canada.
Élisabeth Borne, Bernard Cazeneuve, Justin Trudeau, Paul Martin
Where is the best place to get married
What are the common area of property maintenance that a home owner must deal with?
Classify each of these as a red fruit or an orange fruit: strawberry, cherry, orange, kumquat, tangerine, raspberry
Who are the parents of Vivek Oberoi?
Sort the following volumes in ascending order: 300 imperial gallons, 2000 imperial pints, 500 litres, 1 cubic meter, 10000 imperial ounces, 1500 imperial quarts.
How do McEwan and Sharp share the same parents if their mother was married to a different man when Sharp was born?
Tell me about Holi and why so many people in the world celebrate it?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Rock gong, Yazheng
When was Mahatma Gandhi born?
Given this paragraph, what is the out of state acceptance rate at the University of Virginia?
What services does Microsoft offer?
How do I become a Data Scientist?
The founder of Gupta dynasty was
Is competition healthy?
What are the big five animals in Africa ?
List down some points about military base from the given passage.
Which is a species of fish? Koi or Toy
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Candombe drums, Datong
what was the early uses of computers?
What is the meaning of 'akamai'?
Why are there so many rules about table manners?
What is a Downcountry Mountain Bike?
What is the best way to get more protein in my diet?
Summarise from the given text, Why do people like pets?
Was the USS Rachel Seaman built in the 20th century?
Write a script about a dystopian past where wars are fought between religion and technology. A younger challenges the ways of the elders.
Name some famous orange cats.
When do Muslims fast?
Who was Thales?
From this list of American sports teams categorise them as American Football, Basketball, Baseball or Hockey. Cincinnati Bengals, Boston Celtics, Washington Capitals, Washington Capitals, Los Angeles Dodgers, Atlanta Braves, Phoenix Suns, New York Rangers, Chicago Bears
How do you cook the perfect pizza?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Tenoroon, Tembor
What is the difference between algebra and calculus?
From this passage, extract the names of the three Amtrak California routes and separate them with commas.
Give me a quick exercise I can do every day
Given this paragraph about the rock band The Basics, what is notable about the Get Back album?
How many bowl games have the University of Georgia football team won?
Provide 5 different ways you could improve a typical home's ambience
What are some good quality movies I can watch?
What is a speech language pathologist?
What is the English football league system?
How do you make money?
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Renault, RAM
Please describe what Business Process Mapping is and why it is used
Classify which of these cars are German brands and which are Japanese: BMW, Mercedes Benz, Nissan, Toyota, Honda, Audi.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Bar Emmon?
Classify the following as "animate" or "inanimate": humans, rocks, houses, plants, trees, cars, flowers, curtains, walls
List five titles by J.K. Rowling.
Why is the sky blue?
What is the difference between aerobic and anaerobic exercise?
Name all the movies in the Harry Potter series
What are some common root vegetables for cooking?
classify each of the following strings as positive or negative: ':)', ':(', 'i love you', 'i do not like you', 'happy', 'sad'
In the first few months how many children were registered?
What is the new format of world cup 2026
What are the common formats of competitive debate in the US?
Are there companies that build a plane end to end?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Cymbal, Kontigi
Name the novel for which Douglas Stuart won the Booker.
Classify each car as a Ford or Tesla: Model Y, F150, Focus, Fiesta, Model X
Which is a species of fish? Tiger barb or Sabretooth
How did the introduction of broadband in India in the early 2000s impact Indian movie culture?
In Islam, cateogorize each of the following as either 'haram' or 'halal'. Pork, Beef, Chicken, Fish, Alcohol, fasting.
Give me a list of actors who won an Oscar in the last 5 years and tell me for which movie they won it.
What is the largest country in South America by land mass?
How long did it take for ironworking to be commonplace in West Africa following its introduction in Northern Africa?
According to this paragraph, what is the only state in North America that is an archpelago?
Write a poem about a little neurodiverse boy with amazing gifts.
Among rock musicians of the late 20th century, tell me which of the following are singers or drummers: Bon Scott, Tommy Lee, Sebastian Bach, Robert Mason, Phil Rudd, Alex Van Halen, Mick Brown, Klaus Meine, David Lee Roth, Rob Halford
Name the two cities in India in which Kirby Building Systems produces their goods.
Which Dickens novel is considered an autobiography
Extract the names of people mentioned and their significance in the following format:

[Name]: [Significance]
What languages are spoken in Tunisia?
write a poem about the state of georgia
What are the names of the four tennis grand slam tournaments?
Which is the oldest civilization in the world?
What is the weather like in New Jersey?
Extract the venues of each Phish concert referenced in this paragraph and list in bulleted format.
What is a Pythagorean triple?
Extract the title of the game, the name of its developer and the name of the main character and separate them by a comma.
What's the architecture in Maskavas Forstate look like?
Is AI a risk to humanity?
What is RTGS?
From the passage provided, extract the union territories that encompass South India. Separate them with a comma.
Classify the below items based on the type of current they use, AC or DC.
charging of batteries, fans, bulbs, air conditioners
What year did World War 2 end?
Give me a sample of three of Australian Animals.
What does it take to become an airplane pilot in the USA?
What are three cities on the east coast of Florida?
Tell me whether each of these ski resorts are in Colorado or California: Big Bear, Mammoth, North Star, Vail, Aspen, Telluride
Many people are hesitant to invest resources toward slowing down or even reversing the effects of climate change because they think it does not make sense if only a small portion of the population invests resources. They think it is stupid to do so until everyone agreed to do so or is forced by policy. What is the reason that some people still do so?
Explain telephone numbering system of Russia ?
Give me a list of the last iceskate i've never seen
Classify the below substances based on their natural physical state.
Water, Mercury, Copper, Oxygen, Nitrogen, Wood
What are some typical characters of Siamese cats?
Besides a putter, what other golf clubs would suffice for a putting stroke?
How do I fix the engine of my car?
What causes an airplane wing to fly?
Identify from this list which are Crayola crayon colors: banana biscuits, razzle dazzle rose, whoopsie daisies, purple pizzazz, carnation pink, cotton candy, unmellow yellow, macaroni and cheese, coffee table blue, craisin, aquamarine, jazzberry jam, sea green
What is Kendrick Lamar famous for?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Tesla, Elektron Motors
Think of three different colors that mens suits are often
How do you make the best shepherds pie?
Using the two paragraphs below, when was the Ukrainian Chorus Dumka of NY founded, and when did it play in Ukraine for the first time?
When is the first day of summer 2023?
is a career in public accounting a good way to go
When cleaning a house, categorize each of the following as "useful" or "not useful": Broom, Mop, Vacuum, Sand, Dirt, Dust Pan, Food
What colours are on the flag of the Netherlands?
What is a Synchronous Concurrent Algorithm (SCA)?
Based on the above passage classify Bermudians based on their descent along with respective percentages in a bracket. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What is the indigenous name for Dunk Island?
Think of a bunch of ways that you could clean a house.
Why do we grow two sets of teeth?
What is the best Florida Key
What are the new 7 Wonders Cities:
what is oracle?
When was the first newspaper published in the United States?
Write a short strategy on how to increase your chances to win a chess game.
What types of BBQ can you get in North Carolina?
Can you summarize for me in no more than three paragraphs the book, "The Little Engine That Could", by Watty Piper?
What does bpa-free mean?
classify the following as sports vs other activities: cricket, talking, writing, running, dancing, football, golf, construction, plumbing, swimming, paragliding, racing, getting late
When was Irina Vysheslavska born?
Is it better to ski or snowboard?
What is molecular biology?
what was the world's first stored-program computer?
What should I do if my laptop has been hacked?
Give me list of last 10 presidents of US.
Write a brief history of the world as told from the perspective of a redwood.
Name well known movies with George Clooney.
Give me a short bulleted list of the key points about the parallel universes in this passage.
Given a reference text about Marcus Morton, tell me what year he was born and why he let the Democratic Party.
How many strings are on a violin?
Where is Seth McFarlane from?
Given the reference text about Tottenham Hotspur, what was the name of the stadium that the new stadium replaced?
Should investors time the market?
What is the concept of a good life according to Socrates and Aristotle, and what are the components that contribute to it? Is a good life innate or learned, and can anyone achieve it?
How much time violinist Ling Ling spent practicing each day?
Was Venice always part of Italy?
How many sides and vertices does a polygon have?
What is Detroit style pizza?
Help me plan a trip to Nova Scotia
Sea or Mountain
Who has hosted Saturday Night Live the most in the history of the show?
Tell me whether these shows are animated or not: South Park, Rugrats, Curb Your Enthusiasm, House Hunters, Attack on Titan
Give me a bulleted list of things to consider when deciding where to apply to college.
Who invented scratching ?
What is the potential hydrogen (ph) of water?
What is fishing tackle?
Why is Citizen Kane considered the Best Film?
what was the biggest tax change from tax reform
Based on the passage provided, who is allowed to drive the beach strand route that connects Bald Head Island and Fort Fisher?
What are ways to calm myself down when I get upset?
How many states are there in the United States?
What are the words of House Swyft?
Tell me whether these sports require a ball or not to play: basketball, hockey, track and field, soccer, surfing, water polo, karate, football, gymnastics, skateboarding, golf, tennis, boxing, baseball, rugby, weightlifting, softball, rowing
Name some famous teams in the Premier League
Given this article about the NSA's ANT catalog, Which hacking tools are used to infect the BIOS of computers or networking devices?
Classify each of the following financial assets as either liquid or illiquid; checking accounts, savings accounts, certificate of deposits (CDs), Stocks, Bonds, mutual funds, Real estate investment trusts (REITs), Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs), 401K, Investment Art, Physical Property.
Given this paragraph about Chief Uncas, who was he?
Who is widely considered the GOAT of basketball?
Give me a listing of ways I can incorporate physical activity into my daily routine.
Which months of the year are considered summer, spring, winter and autumn.
Write a passage about how you learnt to ride the bike
What is Dharma Sabha
Given me a list of the seven most recent Indian prime ministers
Based on the reference text, provide a concise overview of the main objectives of the Federal Reserve
What is the key to longevity?
I want to go to Europe, which of these cities are in that continent? Lisbon, Barcelona, Paris, Rome, London, Tokyo, New York City, Perth?
Which is a species of fish? American sole or American dream
Why is football/soccer called the beautiful game.
Why Bollywood is so famous
What was the Cold War?
Tell me whether these games are exclusives or multi-platform: The Legend of Zelda, Call of Duty, Sly Cooper, God of War, Counter-Strike, Mario, Pokemon, Halo, Dota, League of Legends.
What are some things I could do as a tourist near Honolulu?
Who is the greatest quarterback of all time?
Help summarize Dallas Cowboys
Given the following paragraph about Kenneth McAlpine, where was he born?
Give me a bulleted list of 5 outdoor activities I could do this weekend.
Who was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics ?
Extract the most famous research of Mary Campbell Dawbarn, and put them in a list.
What is a Cigar
How do you fry shrimp?
Based on the reference text, how did the United States implement separation of powers?
What ingredients do i need to make sour dough bread
Which is a species of fish? Sea raven or Raven
What is a dig in baseball?
What are "VTubers"?
Who is the oldest driver to win a Formula 1 race?
Do humans have stripes?
Name some of the popular sitcoms from 1990s
What is the best way to catch fish from pond
Give me a bulleted list of movie ideas.
Categorize each of the following classes as either 'hard', 'medium', 'easy': english writing, math, history, chemistry, physics.
How do I turn on my Tesla Y?
Tomas is a 50-yr-old nonsmoking male who was recently invited by colleagues to participate in a 10-km trail run. He's been walking for 40 minutes 3 days a week, something he's maintained “for years”. His goal is to run the entire 10K race without stopping. He reports having what he describes as a “mild heart attack” at 45 years old, completed cardiac rehabilitation, and has had no problems since. He takes a statin and a low-dose aspirin daily. During his last visit (2 years ago) with his cardiologist, no changes were noted in his medical condition. Can you brainstorm reasons why Tomas's physician would prescribe a statin? Make sure to explain how this medication works.
Select the dishes that are Chinese from this menu: hamburger, pizza, fried rice, soup dumplings, spaghetti, scallion pancakes.
Tell me whether companies keep each of these confidential or publish publicly: acquisition targets, customer data, marketing materials, blog posts, product instructions
Extract the different kinds of leavening agents mentioned in this passage. Separate them with a comma.
Given these paragraphs about Multiomics, what is single-cell multiomics?
What links Willie Brant, Lech Walesa, Yasser Arafat
Is Parsenn nice for skiing
Categorize each of the following as a grocery store or restaurant: Publix, Texas Roadhouse, Bonefish, Costco, Aldi, McDonalds, KFC, Whole Foods
Classify each of the following as either an animal or plant: elephant, tree, tulip, human, dog, rose
Who is the inventor of electric light?
What does the idiom burning your bridges mean?
Provide a bulleted list of reasons why Tesla stock could go up in the future.
Should I buy a horse?
Given the biography of Nemacolin, what years did George Washington use Nemacolin's Path?
When did WWII begin?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dhimay, Swarabat
What year was the Northwest School in Seattle founded?
What is the name of Dorothy's dog?
Why isn't Puerto Rico a US state?
From the passage, extract the list of movies that Pedro Almodovar produced. Include the year and the name. Place them in a bullet list.
Write an argument for keeping public lands under federal control in the Intermountain West.
What is a string quartet?
List 7 exotic fruits that I should try.
What are the following: Palm Pre, iPhone, Samsung Galaxy Note, Razr, HTC One X
What is the first computer recognized in human history?
Write a mother’s negative review for a dentist office with a dirty waiting room.
Which cities in China are self-governing cities? Beijing, Shanghai, Changsha, Shenzhen
How to prevent the extinction of the human species?
Find the bird in this list: Avocado, Avocet, Avian
Who is the Patron Saint of Ireland?
Extract the causes of income inequality in the United States mentioned in the text. Separate them with a comma.
When was Genghis Khan born?
Who is the most beautiful lady in the world now
What's the difference between metrics and logs?
Can you write a Haiku about using AI?
What weaponry was the U-3030 submarine equipped with?
When did space exploration begin ?
In music theory, what is the circle of fifths?
Who won the 2004 World Series?
What is the best way to cook a steak?
who is Hugh Ogden?
Given this paragraph, what are the potential advantages or disadvantages of using XGBoost versus a single decision tree?
Given the reference text about Fidel Castro, tell me where he was born, where he studied, and when he was the leader of Cuba.
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of the half dome hike.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Octofone, Suona
Where is the Walmart corporate home office located?
Which colors are in a rainbow?
Who was Lem Tucker?
Make arguments for and against Majora's Mask being a better game than Ocarina of Time.
Does spark provide date & time when a particular event is received in the structured streaming?
Are tequila and mezcal basically the same thing?
What is the capital of Alabama?
Why do people fly on airplanes?
Which of the following people were Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom? Margaret Thatcher, Winston Churchill, Queen Elizabeth II, Benjamin Disraeli, Thomas Cromwell
Jill, a 60-year-old personal training client, wants to improve her hip flexibility. She
repeatedly bounces up and down, trying to touch her toes from a standing position. Will hip
flexibility be the expected outcome of this exercise? Is her technique appropriate? What
modifications would you make, if any?
Name some famous cartoon cats.
Where is Ivan Trotski from?
Why are drums so important to music, and what this appeal to have live drums in the modern world where drum beats can easily be sampled, and/or perfectly mimicked  by software?
Give me a list of authors from Florida
Name some popular video games exclusive to Sony’s Playstation game consoles.
Name a song The Mo is best known for that is not named after a dairy product.
What is the largest country in the world?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Ford, Brabus
Where did Jon Rahm go to college?
Who wrote the book "The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Families" ?
Based on this paragrah, what indie band released the album "Popsicle"?
Using the following text, extract the last 3 CEO's. Place them in a bullet list in order of current to least current.
How do you call the Arkansas Razorbacks?
What is a speedrun in video games?
What is GraphQL?
How can you answer questions like "Are certain kinds of storms responsible to drive certain type of disease related group (DRG) admits?"?
Manchester of South India ?
Let me know some different ways that someone can get healthier.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Repique, Neola
why am I required to do onboarding training?
Extract the shows that Bini the Bunny was featured. Separate them with a comma.
Do all dog breeds have long tails?
Should generative AI be banned from the classroom ?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Asian Elephant, Dire Wolf
Which countries produces the most wine?
Why does the capital of Uzbekistan contain the biggest Greek community?
What is pan genomics?
Write an email to my landlord explaining why I missed rent payment this month.
Name some of the most well-known Valyrian steel swords.
Can we move away from fossil fuels in the next decade  ?
Give me the top 7 songs on billboard right now
What are some of the challenges and solutions involved in growing tomatoes in the Pacific Northwest?
Which of the following animals live in the snow: Dog, Bonobos, Cat, Polar bear, Whale shark, Arctic fox, Orangutans, Snow leopard, Lion, Ocean sunfish, Koala, Cheetah, Beluga sturgeon, Orca, Gorillas, Camel, Hamsters, Penguins, Blue whale, Chimpanzee
How useful is toothpaste
Was Jesus and actual person
what is a scottish fold cat?
Write instructions to a dog sitter for a dog named Chunkie
What origins and destinations does Delta Vacations offer?
Is double checked locking safe?
Which tournaments did Raymond Charles Haoda play in? List them in a comma separated format.
What did batteries get invented?
Given this short summary of Giovan Battista Cavagna, how long did it take to build the second Monte di Pieta?
What does Neolithic mean?
How old were the indigenous civilizations in Mexico prior to European contact?
What is Ultimate Frisbee?
Do the following activities typically happen at night or during the day? A hike in a park, stargazing, going to a beach tidepool, dinner at a restaurant, looking for shooting stars, working a desk job
What is the Pareto principle?
Extract the different types of milk distribution containers mentioned in the text and list them using bullets in the format {container type} - {volume}
Make a list of pets you would want if you knew they wouldn’t bite you
Can you give me some details about the moroccan geography ?
What are some indoor sports I can play in winter?
List some of the endocrinology societies and organizations within Europe and specifically talk about the United Kingdom.
What is the tallest building in Seattle?
Who was Charles Guillaume Loys de Bochat
What are the northern lights?
If you had pogonophobia what would you be afraid of
How many sexes are there and how many genders are there and what's the difference?
Please give me a bulleted list of countries that make up the Indian subcontinent from this passage
Given a reference text about the Annapurna Post, tell me when it launched its online news portal and when it became successful.
Given this paragraph about Kobe beef, tell me what type of cattle it is from
When do you think humans can set feet on Mars
What was the first vid on YT?
Name some famous paintings by Van Gogh.
Tell me if these are professional soccer players or professional surfers: Lionel Messi, Kelly Slater, Neymar Jr., Kanoa Igarashi, Zinedine Zidane, Mark Occhilupo, Gabriel Medina, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Ngolo Kante, Miguel Pupo
Who is the Avatar? And what was he trying to accomplish?
What are some silly things to drink out of instead of a cup?
What are things people do in the morning?
What are some examples of different types of beer?
What are some things to consider when going to a theme park?
If you had to survive on a deserted island by yourself for a month, classify these items as 'useful' or 'not useful'.
When was the Memphis album released
List 3 cities on the east coast of Australia.
Who are Coldplay
What makes the banded bullfrog special
Why do people like skiing or snowboarding down a mountain?
Tell me whether these beverages are acidic: Orange Juice, Grapefruit Juice, Coca-Cola, Soy Milk, Coconut Water, Carrot Juice
Where can I ride roller coasters in the united states?
There are three rock types; igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. I have a list of rocks, can you please tell me what type of rocks they are? These are the rocks: Sandstone, Granite, Marble, Basalt, Chalk, Slate.
What are some types of sorting algorithms?
Given a reference text about the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, when was OPEC founded and how do economists describe OPEC's power over oil markets?
Where was Ostad Elahi born and who was his father
Why Spark is faster than MapReduce?
Write a short story about a botanist who discovers a part of a forest where plants are communicating with each other.
Where was buddha born?
Classify these as things you need to peel in order to eat or things that you don't need to peel: orange, apple, oats, banana, potato
What is one of your favorite hobbies?
Does taking long walks do anything good for my health?
What are some good sci-fi books I can read?
List down last 7 fifa women's world cup winners
What are the primary features of a gravity hill given the following description?
Based on this paragraph about the potential Kontinental Hockey League expansion, how many divisions and how many conferences would the proposed league have?
How did they build the Fireworks of Glass in the Indy children's museum built?
Did Paul Ernest Adolph ever served the military?
From the passage provided, extract the names of the sisters of Jawaharlal Nehru. Separate them with a comma.
Why is the rover called Perseverance?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Scutosaurus, Yellowfin Tuna
Given a reference text about a former President of India, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, tell me when he was born, where he was raised and the subjects he specialised in studies. Why was Abdul Kalam known as the Missile Man of India?
List five titles by Gertrude Chandler Warner
From the paragraph, tell me what is a dredger
Give me a bulleted list of 3 books Thomas Sowell has written and what they are about.
Which is a species of fish? Paradise fish or Heaven
what is the national language for India?
From the passage provided, extract the years when the galaxies were added to the catalogue. Include the names of astronomers that added them. Separate them with a comma.
Can you classify what each NFL team is named after?
Extract the destination countries of Azorean emigrants. Separate them with a comma.
Based on this questio about Kingdom Hearts, what company published it?
How do I make great Neapolitan pizza dough at home?
As per the passage which languages did Ram Mohan Roy know?
When and where was John Barrett born?
How do you get dressed in the morning?
Where is WIOO served to license?
What was the US civil war about?
From the passage provided, extract the gravitational constant on Earth. Include the units of measurements.
What is the best way to teach your kids how to read?
Classify each of the following activities as "active" or "lazy": Running, jogging, biking, watching TV, drinking beer, laying down, lifting weights
I'm a 12-year-old girl and I want to have my own cellphone because everyone else in my class have one. I just want to be part of the group and join their conversations. My mother did not refuse my request, but she asked me how to solve her concerns about the potential harm to me. What should I do to convince her to give me a cellphone? Here are here concerns:
1. Using cellphone too much would harm your eye sight. Especially for teenagers, whose eyes are still growing, it's very easy to have near-sight pretty quickly.
2. Using cellphone too much would take too much of your time, and you would spend less time reading books, doing exercises, playing outside, talking to people, which harms your overall development. Adults like me already ready lots of books, did lots of exercises, and talked to a lot of people when I was a teenager, so I already developed those skills.
3. Using cellphone too much would make you feel hard to focus on one thing. The scattered information would stimulate your attention, and make you feel excited at superficial contents, and don't think deeply.
4. You might accidentally lost your cellphone, and you will feel sad about it. Teenagers usually are more likely to lost things than adults in general.
You stumble upon a new animal, one the world has never seen. What is it and how did you come up with it's name?
Which of the following are breeds of dogs:
Dachshund, Tabby, Russian Blue, Airedale Terrier, Papillon, Bengal, Greyhound
Which one of these is a country: Banana, Chicken, Pine tree, or Japan?
How to remove grease on clothes after a bike trip?
Why do people like Electronic Dance Music?
What are some popular fantasy book series
List high quality binge worthy tv shows
What are the words of House Wendwater?
Are leafcutters solitary or social insects?
Tell me whether these clothes are formal or informal: suit, tuxedo, bathing suit, gym shorts, slacks, tank top
Was Valery Ivanov a spy
Why are visualisations useful for communicating information?
Give me some good stock investing tips.
Based on this paragraph, what are the main applications of DNA Sequencing?
Can you explain the lyrics “His whole back's to these ropes, it don't matter, he's dope” in the song lose yourself by Eminem?
Given this background text about the Byzantine Empire, which empire can the Byzantines trace their origins?
Who was involved with the epic poker league?
True or false, fish live on land?
What is APR?
What are the options to get from South Shields to North Shields by public transport and which is the quickest option
Based on this reference text about bull sharks, why can bull sharks live in both salt and fresh water?
Who painted the Two Monkeys
What do people usually do at a birthday party?
From the passage provided, extract the two main changes from the 2022 and 2023 J1 Japanese football league.
Generate word problem on ratios suitable for grade 10
How many seasons of Greatest American Hero were there?
What is room temperature?
From the passage identify the founders of Confinity. Display the results in comma separated format.
list the different types of biryani
When did the England national team last win the football World Cup
Name some female characters from "The X-Files."
Which of the following animals is a mammal: Human, Dog, Elephants, Cat, Bats, Goat, Bears, Sheep, Wolf, Lion, Squirrel, Koala, Cheetah, Deer, Orca, Gorillas, Camel, Hamsters, Hedgehog, Blue whale, Chimpanzee
Can you please tell some details about Malhar Rao Holkar from the given text?
Why do humans need sunshine?
What are the advantages and disadvantages of learning Java over Python?
Create a LinkedIn post for sharing the news of an achievement in company.
Change this sentence to paste tense
Who is Kenny Ortega?
What is Davis, CA known for?
What is the name of the New England professional football team?
Who invented cement that could be set underwater?
Give me a bulleted list of who received the last best player awards at the World Cup.
Who wrote The Godfather?
How does scoring in tennis work?
Describe a scary moment in a storm.
What is John Ellis water and the bond angle of water?
Write an example message asking your friend Tony to go to a baseball game with you
I have a vegan friend coming over for dinner, which of the items in my kitchen can I use to make vegan food: chicken, kale, lettuce, honey, eggplant, tomato, rice,  cheese, yoghurt, ice-cream and chocolate.
Give me a title of one of the "Harry Potter" novels.
Which is a bird or fish: Black tern, Blackfin tuna
Which of the following are not colors of the rainbow spectrum?  Purple, Blue, Aqua, Orange, Black, Violet, Pink
What is the name of the National Anthem of the Netherlands?
What are legos?
Who turned oil drums into steel drums for music?
What are some Asian fusion lunches that are a one-bowl style meal? Please list the ingredients for each idea and include at least one vegetarian option.
Does platonic love hurt?
List the Big Four accounting firms.
On what day did the invasion of Normandy, France occur in World War II?
Test
Name three beaches in Pinellas County, Florida
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: Jeep, Karry
Which is a species of fish? Prickleback or Prickle
What was Lieutenant Columbo's catch phrase on his TV show?
What countries are these names most likely to be found among native-born citizens? John Smith, Elise Monet, Helmut Schneider, Jing Li, Raj Patel
Give me an idea for a random sandwich that I should make for lunch.
Identify all of the breeds of dogs in this list:

Banana
Poodle
Pekingese
Hunan
Apple
Peach
Lettuce
Arubian Cucunu
German Shepherd
Jack Russell Terrier
Wolfhound
Pariah Dog
Tamales
Coquito
Mezcal
Gingko
Papaya
Sequoia
Redwood
Maple
Dogwood
Afghan Hound
Airedale Terrier
Camphor Tree
Eucalyptus
Chihuaha
Basenji
Bichon Frise
Blue Spruce
Magnolia
Cacao
Black Locust
Tequila
Given a reference text about Stanley Franklin Browne, how many aerial victories during World War II did he have and what did he do when he returned from the war.
how important is workflow integration in obtaining value from AI?
Tell me which of the following cartoon characters are in Bluey: Chilli, Tom, Jerry, Bandit, Bluey, Peppa, Mickey, Scooby, Bingo, Chester.
Randy Couture was one of how many fighters over the age of 40 to have won a UFC championship?
What are 5 ways to eat apples?
Give me a summary of the Naked Brothers Band.
How do you shift a manual transmission in vehicle?
When was the Landscape Arch named and by whom?
What is the Kentucky Derby Trophy
What are the continents from largest to smallest?
What is Stiftung Lesen ?
Is Dosa a South Indian Food?
What are the words of House Hastwyck?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Tyrannosaurus Rex, Amazon River Dolphin
Extract a list of album names from this paragraph on the history of the rock band Nirvana, as a comma separated list
What's the best way to learn something?
Which items should we not eat for a weight loss diet? Banana, Ice-cream, milk tea, chocolate, dates, bakery biscuits, cold drinks.
A client with whom you have been training for 10 weeks retakes a submaximal exercise test and finds that his heart rate is lower at each stage (workload) of the test. He is bothered by this because he thought his heart would be stronger and beat more times per minute. Brainstorm an easy-to-understand explanation to help him understand what is going on. How would you respond?
What was the race consisted of?
What are some benefits of public transportation?
Given these paragraphs about Natural hydrogen, what are some of its sources?
Who was Kevin Durant traded for when he was traded to the Suns?
Given this paragraph about the Japan Rail Pass, tell me whether it is available for purchase to Japanese citizens.
Who was the King of Swing
classify the following people as males vs females:
john oliver
stephen colbert
vir das
oprah winfrey
michelle obama
donald trump
queen of england
halle berry
joseph stalin
Write an friendly, convincing e-mail to my landlord asking whether I can get a dog.
Please summarize the history of the development of Roche Percee based on this article
When was West Ham started and when did they get the name West Ham United?
List some import aspects about location Ljubija in given text
Why it's important to keep positive
Give me a short summary of the Industrial Revolution
What is the volume of a square pyramid?
Is Tesla's strategy sustainable in the face of increasing competition from incumbents and entrants in the fully electric vehicle market? How should they respond to the growing competitive threat?
Can you tell me about Rugby Union?
How many people attended the Summer Breeze Open Air?
Was She Couldn't Say No movie re-released?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Kenning of Kayce?
Is Boston a good city to visit in the summer?
Why is MPPT necessary?
How many people live in the Netherlands
What are some of the most popular card games?
What is Puha, New Zealand
Where is Independence mall?
What is the list of ingredients for the Lebanese tabbouleh recipe?
Extract out the various endorsements Twice has done and separate them with a comma
When was the Boeing 747 first entered into service?
Give me a list of sports talk shows to watch while I make dinner.
What are the most common causes of avalanches, in descending order of likelihood (where most likely is first)?
Which amendment to the US constitution protects the rights of its citizens to own shotguns?
Summarize the parliamentary 2023 elections results in Andorra
How do you replace a hole in the drywall?
List great neighborhoods to raise a family in East County San Diego
When did Peloton IPO?
What is the air speed velocity of an unladen swallow?
Will, a 45-yr-old former collegiate swimmer turned lifelong triathlete, requests assistance with run training. His only significant medical history is a series of overuse injuries to his shoulders and Achilles tendon. In recent weeks, he notes his workouts are unusually difficult and reports feeling constriction in his chest with exertion – something he attributes to deficiencies in core strength. Upon further questioning, he explains that the chest constriction is improved with rest and that he often feels dizzy during recovery. What do you think is the underlying problem that could be causing Will’s symptoms during/after exercise?
Tell me whether these words are English or Spanish: dog, cat, perro, gato, house, casa
What is Intel Xeon good for?
What are the causes of Autism?
Tell me whether these animals are poisonous or not poisonous: rattlesnake, scorpion, box jellyfish, king cobra, Indian python, koala, porcupine
How Fast Does An Average Person Run?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Taal, Akonting
Which of the following are renewable energies and which are fossil fuels: natural gas, wind energy, hydropower, oil shales, solar power, coal, and petroleum.
Provide 5 factors to consider when deciding where to live
Why is the sky blue?
What does yoga do to your body?
Tell me which of these stores sells furnitures: Safeway, dollar tree, HEB, IKEA, home depot, walmart
Who is the NBA's all team leading scorer?
Write an essay about whether corona policy measures are beneficial towards society or not
Who was India's first Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister
Why is working out good for you?
Is KQKZ a commercial radio station?
List the states which are part of the western ghat
What are the best National Parks in the United States
Are there polar bears in Antarctica?
How do you add two or more numbers
Who was Loku Nilame Adikaram Ratwatte
What is the trias politica?
What is the half-life of Iodine-125?
what was the manhattan project during world war 2?
What is the oldest written complaint?
Name some famous experimental electronic music artists from the 2000s
What's the origin of Dog Day Afternoon?
Give me a list of the best high fantasy books or series that I should read
From the passage provided, extract the name of the coach of Gujarat Giants
What year was the Ice Bowl played in?
Based on this paragraph on Japanese bullet trains, how many cars do the longest trains have?
Which trophy was Frost able to keep and why?
What is the sum of angles in a triangle?
Are Rainbow Trout and Steelhead the same?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Koi, Common Carp
In Paul Simon's famous song, how many different ways are there to leave your lover?
Classify the below companies based on their country of origin -
LG Corporation, Samsung, Apple Inc., Tesla, Inc.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Spinet, Caval
What are the books in Harry Potter series in order?
Does my data need to fit in memory to use Spark?
Tell me whether these are nouns or verbs: Run, Dance, Slide, Jump, Think, Book, Noah Webster, Cat, Omaha, Softness, Justice.
Which of these are Hindu Gods and Goddesses: Ganesh, Krishna, Prachin, Kalash, Ram, Durga
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Berimbau, Soku
What happens when someone throws a phone onto a mattress?
What is a career grand slam in professional golf?
Where in France do claret wines come from
Given these paragraphs about the Tesla bot, what is its expected height and weight?
What is Agent Fox Mulder's badge number?
Give me a list of the best adventure books
Tell me a number of ways that one could entertain a small group of 6 year old children.
Which continent does the following countries belong to: USA, Sweden, China, Taiwan, Japan, Germany, Great Britain, Canada, Peru, Chile
Tell me about life growing up in Singapore from a local's point of view. This local must have been born in Singapore at least after 1985 and is someone who enjoys his/her time growing up in Singapore.
Do you know anything about the writer Joshua Braff
Why am I so sad all the time?
What planning should you do to visit Walt Disney World?
Extract a list of calendars mentioned and display the names in valid, well-formatted JSON
What is a geoboard made of?
What is the main difference between ORC and Parquet?
What are a few dishes you can cook with potatoes?
Given this paragraph about Indiana Jones, tell me who starred in the franchise films with Harrison Ford
Give me a list of hobbies
How do you treat a dog diarrhea
Which of the following items would I need on a surf trip? Surfboard, leash, tent, knife, wetsuit, batteries, granola bars, bag of grapes, lead weights, a dump truck, the complete collection of Beach Boys albums on vinyl.
How large is the Earth?
What is a music chord?
What is the difference between a mechanical watch and a quartz watch?
Identify which car manufacturer is Chinese or American: BAIC, GMC
What are four universities in the state of Texas?
Tell me whether these auto manufacturers are located in Germany or Japan: Volkswagen, Toyota, BMW, Honda, Adam Opel, Mazda, Daimler, Subaru, Continental, Hino
Tell me which of the following have been known to attack humans: mouse, goldfish,  bears, mugs, cactus, moss, nudibranches, corals, hippos, wolves.
How to detect that a number is odd or even?
Name different types of paper you would see in a notebook
Why is the Saguaro cactus important to Arizona?
From the passage list down the location of Visa data centers. List the results in semi colon separated format.
Why are drill jigs less commonly used today than they were in the past?
Can birds sleep in the air?
What do giant Pandas eats?
Based on the following passage, extract recorded instructions for housekeepers from around 100 BC.
Given the reference text about the genus Banksia, tell me how many species of Banksia there are and what size they can grow to.
Classify each of the following as either a stringed instrument or a percussion instrument: violin, guitar, drums, congas, bongos, bass guitar.
Given these paragraphs about Natural hydrogen, can you name some of the countries where sources have been identified?
Which of the following countries are monarchies? United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg, United States, Russia, Poland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Spain
As a Manager, how can I use Clifford's Strengthsfinder?
I'm looking to learn a new programming language. Can you recommend one?
What are the names of the social insects that are mentioned?
Is the economy doing well right now?
List several ways to take ice cubes out of a glass?
What are some movies starring Chevy Chase
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Maiasaura, Sea Lions
What is Accrued income security
Think of a bunch of different ways you could lift weights at home without any dumbbells or gym equipment.
On which national flag is there an eagle and a snake
Is the lacavore diet beneficial?
How to get a good Survey for a product
Where do U2 come from?
What is the best way to make a camp fire
Is Aetolia at sea level?
What is the difference between Football and Futsal?
How was Liberum Veto mis-used?
What is the difference between table salt and kosher salt?
Why was Harry Potter famous in the wizarding world?
Why are in person events important to business growth?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Ahenk, Arghul
Based on the following passage, create a list os when schools close and resume in England and Wales, Scotland and Canada.
Which places are near Lightwater.
Write a poem about a raven
Given this paragraph about material, what is lithophane?
Extract the list of science fiction awards from the paragraph below in the form of bulleted list, each item should include award name and whom is it presented by.
Give me a list of pets that require low maintenance.
Who is Roger Federer?
Should I use microservices for my project? How many microservices should I have?
Give me a list of free email service provider other than Gmail.
Suggest some fantasy books I could read?
Where is Lebanon ?
Extract from this text a list of the major films, books, and art pieces of Bruce Petty's career.
What are some interactive toys for toddlers?
What are key facts that characterize the country of Canada?
How many members are there in Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
List five titles by George R.R. Martin.
Who is Miley Cyrus?
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Canoo, Pegasus
How many volumes of Wheel of Time are there?
who is nayanthara ?
Which is the largest football stadium in Europe
What does a biological anthropologist study?
What are the benefits of ranked voting?
Why Audi Q5 sportsback is best over its rival
Which human rights organisation founded 1961 got Nobel 1977
from this blob of text about gosberton clough, to which city does the river flow to?
What is Gyebangsan?
Which is a species of fish? Slipmouth or Slipknot
Given a reference text about a president, tell me when he died.
I need to buy a Vinyl record for my friend's birthday. What are some suggestions of classic vinyl records.
Who is Vincent Paterson?
What is the capital of Tamilnadu?
Who won the Man Booker International Prize for  2019?
Roger likes bananas more than strawberries. He likes bananas more than apples, and he likes strawberries more than melons. He likes apples more than strawberries. Which fruit does Roger like least of those three?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Fossoway?
What trait do you think everyone should have?
what was the impact on software companies from the revenue standard called 606?
Who are the greatest soccer players of all time?
How long do hump back whales live?
What is the University of Texas mascot?
Name five professional sports teams in the state of New York.
What makes for a great pizza?
Classify each of the following as either a Nintendo character or a Sega character: Mario, Princess Peach, Sonic, Tails, Doctor Eggman, Luigi, Link, Zelda, Alex Kidd, Donkey Kong, AiAi, Gilius Thunderhead, Bob-Omb
Tell me which of these terms are related to artificial intelligence versus gardening: tilling, seed, gradient descent, production, Bayesian optimization, genetically modified organism, heirloom, transfer learning
Tell me where the following numbers are odd or even: 13, 200, 334, 420, 5, 12
Based on the reference text, provide a bulleted list of the three stages of ISO 27001 Certification and the activities of each stage.
List five titles by Anne Rice.
Which state joined the US on March 15, 1820?
Current industry trends and how to capitalize on them?
Which company introduced new kits for Marseille?
Name some famous rock bands from the San Francisco Bay Area.
give me a summary of the American revolution
Why is Arizona the best state to live in?
Where did the random walk hypothesis come from?
What can I do with a broken stapler?
Classify each of the following as a green vegetable or a yellow vegetable: bell pepper, zucchini, broccoli, kale, summer squash, sweet potato, corn, onion, golden beet, spinach.
What is the Richland home
Classify each of the following sports terminologies by sport: Earned Run Average, WHIP, Bicycle Kick, Touchdown, Safety, Quality Start, Runs, RBI, Stolen Base, Batting Average, Inning, Strikeout, Shortstop, Striker, Sweeper, Stopper, Relief Pitcher, Nutmeg, Slide Tackle, Extra Point, Barrel Rate, Midfielder, Yellow Card, Red Card, Corner Kick, Goal Kick, Set Piece, Direct Free Kick, FIFA, MLS, Concacaf, Half Volley, Full Volley, Base on Balls, Batter's Box, Mound, Breaking Ball, Slider, Designated Hitter, Knuckle Ball, No Hitter, Triple Play, Double Play, Wild Pitch, Linebacker, Running Back, Quarterback, Wide Receiver, Tight End, Chop Block
What books would you recommend someone read to improve their general knowledge of the world?
How many golf clubs can a player carry in their bag?
What is Human Development Report (HDI) based on?
Who was the first woman ever inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame?
What are some different types of natural disasters?
What is the expense ratio for an ETF?
What is electronics engineering?
Jill, a 60-year-old personal training client, wants to improve her hip flexibility. Jill is concerned about her balance and the risk of falling. Recommend two exercises she can do to improve balance.
Name five water Pokemon.
5 Best place to visit near Bangalore
What is Assembler?
What recording artist has won the most Grammys?
Chronological order of the Alien movie universe
Why is the sport commonly known as "Ultimate Frisbee" legally recognized only as "Ultimate"?
On a cross country roadtrip across the United States where we expect to drive for many hours per day, categorize each of the following as either 'necessary', 'somewhat necessary' or 'nice to have'. A bathroom break, a music playlist, snacks, a map.
Tell me if these are foods that need to be refrigerated, frozen or neither: ice cream, popsicles, butter, popcorn, yogurt, cereal, chips
Did automobiles exist prior to the invention of the ICE (internal combustion engine)?
Who are the top three winningest college football coaches
Summarize the opening of the Gettysburg Address in simple modern English. 

"Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.

Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battle-field of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this."
Tell me whether each of these countries is north or south of the equator: Finland, Canada, South Africa, Iceland, Germany, Uruguay, Zimbabwe
Are you going for a walk today?
What year was the car manufacturer Ferrari founded in?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Red Hood, Bucky Barnes
How many syllables are in the word reverberate?
Help me come up with a cost efficient shopping plan for my family of four.
What is Area 51 and what makes it famous?
Who is the best rock and roll drummer of all time?
How do you throw a cutter in Wiffle Ball?
Given the this paragraph about the invention of transistors, why did lawyers at Bell Labs advise Shockley against filing a patent for his field-effect transistors?
Who is the first astronaut to get into space in China?
What does electronics deal with?
what is a computer system?
What coloring of cat is almost always male?
What is special about Luis Miguel's music?
What is bubble tea?
Which is a species of fish? Lemon shark or Lemon
What is a data warehouse and how are they used?
What are the words of House Marbrand?
What is a Melanochromis simulans
Which states are part of the New England region?
Write a short story that demonstrates the difference between coaching and mentorship
Extract the key elements from the paragraph about Apple and list them in bullet points
What is the best time to visit Florida?
Which MLB baseball team has the most World Series wins?
summarize the responsibilities of a data architect
Please give me a short bulleted list of the characteristics of lenticular galaxies.
Best vacation in Mexico
Give me a brief history of the construction of Walt Disney World
Describe a tense scene of a dystopian, futuristic, ritualistic gathering of hooded and masked individuals discussing the evolving threat of intelligent machines.
Why is a refrigerator door more difficult to open than usual soon after you have closed it?
Who are Torvill and Dean?
Which episode of "The X-Files" was broadcast in black-and-white?
Explain the difference of position against the Western Bloc among the Soviet leaders cited in the text.
Name four pork products I could expect to find in a delicatessen
who are the greatest Raider players
Which university has Purdue Pete as their mascot?
Give me 5 kinds of nuts that are delicious.
How can I travel backwards in time?
How many F1 races are there in a year?
Which is the best tube line?
Provide a bulleted list of the different shapes of lenses
What's fun about disc golf?
When was slavery abolished in the United States?
Is Arsenal the most successful Soccer team in England?
Why do people exercise?
Create a dialogue between two characters discussing the impact of social media on their lives. Your dialogue should explore both the positive and negative effects of social media on society.
What are the stated main reasons the iAPX432 architecture failed?
What equipment is required for scuba diving?
Summarize the following paragraph about Microsoft in 2 sentences:

Microsoft Corporation is an American multinational technology corporation headquartered in Redmond, Washington. Microsoft's best-known software products are the Windows line of operating systems, the Microsoft Office suite, and the Internet Explorer and Edge web browsers. Its flagship hardware products are the Xbox video game consoles and the Microsoft Surface lineup of touchscreen personal computers. Microsoft ranked No. 14 in the 2022 Fortune 500 rankings of the largest United States corporations by total revenue; it was the world's largest software maker by revenue as of 2022. It is considered as one of the Big Five American information technology companies, alongside Alphabet (parent company of Google), Amazon, Apple, and Meta (formerly Facebook).

Microsoft was founded by Bill Gates and Paul Allen on April 4, 1975, to develop and sell BASIC interpreters for the Altair 8800. It rose to dominate the personal computer operating system market with MS-DOS in the mid-1980s, followed by Windows. The company's 1986 initial public offering (IPO), and subsequent rise in its share price, created three billionaires and an estimated 12,000 millionaires among Microsoft employees. Since the 1990s, it has increasingly diversified from the operating system market and has made a number of corporate acquisitions, their largest being the acquisition of LinkedIn for $26.2 billion in December 2016, followed by their acquisition of Skype Technologies for $8.5 billion in May 2011.

As of 2015, Microsoft is market-dominant in the IBM PC compatible operating system market and the office software suite market, although it has lost the majority of the overall operating system market to Android. The company also produces a wide range of other consumer and enterprise software for desktops, laptops, tabs, gadgets, and servers, including Internet search (with Bing), the digital services market (through MSN), mixed reality (HoloLens), cloud computing (Azure), and software development (Visual Studio).
How can I read and write data with Delta Lake?
Who are the almoravids ?
What are a few words that can be used to describe running?
On a visit to a movie theater, classify the likelihood of finding each of the following as either 'highly likely', 'likely', 'unlikely' or 'highly unlikely'. popcorn, M&Ms, sushi, salad, pasta.
What is the difference between software engineer and systems engineer?
What are the names of the songs from The Story of June which don't have Chinese names?
Tell me about Cris Gunther
how to use coffee mug other than drinking
Which of the following are chocolates: 5 Star, Dairy Milk, Bar One, Chips Ahoy, Oreo, Bounty, Mars, Milky Way, Lay's, Bananas.
Make me a list of some countries I could visit if I wanted to take a beach vacation. Give me options in multiple timezones
Who called Timothy Leary a brave neuronaut?
Is there really no speed limit on the German Autobahn?
What are the components of sound reproduction that are important in a home setting?
Tell me whether these countries hosted the Olympics: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo (Congo-Brazzaville), Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia (Czech Republic), Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, "Eswatini , Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar (formerly Burma), Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Palestine State, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Korea, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Categorize these colors as either warm colors or cool colors: yellow, red, blue, green, white, black.
What are the Current assets in finance?
What makes Destiny 2 a popular game?
What are some ways to cool off on a hot day?
When and where was Nero born?
How many minutes in a football match?
Give me a list of good psychedelic rock bands that I'd like
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Vaquita, Daeodon
What are the names of some great New England Patriots football players?
Extract the names of the noble award winners, respective category and year in which they got  from given text and list them using bullets in the format {Name} - {Category} - {Year}
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Octoban, Socavon
What is R language?
What is the best Hip-Hop artist of all time ?
Classify each of the following as a fast food or sit down restaurant: McDonalds, Subway, Chili's, Popeyes, Carrabbas, Domino's, Hooters
When was the second series of Renminbi banknotes introduced in China?
Extract the person who founded Microsoft
Write some important points about the National Basketball League from the given text
How can I sleep well at night?
How can you put up a painting on a concrete wall
Given the following note about training in a specific style of karate, tell me why its practitioners consider its fist alignment to offer advantages for their striking.
Who is the greatest tennis player of all time?
Is Leaning Tower of Pisa structure stabilized?
What are the five romance languages?
Where is the Bulgan Volcanic Field located?
What is a mediterranean diet?
How many seasons is Deadwood?
What is a good soccer club in Lake Washington area in the USA?
What are the fanciest places to live in San Diego?
Extract why Jerry Rice is the greatest wide receiver of all time.
Before Miley Cyrus recorded "Wrecking Ball," it was offered to which singer?
Why can we only see one side of the Moon?
Extract the most visited countries in Africa and list them using bullets in the format {Country} - {International tourist arrivals (2019)}
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kundu, Kabosy
Who are Kim Kardashian's siblings?
What do Catholics believe?
What is a mirepoix?
Classify each of the following cloud-based service as either AWS, Azure, or GCP: Redshift, Big Query, Lambda, Purview, Looker.
What is Huallacancha?
how can you benefit from sauna?
What do dogs like to do?
Who founded the Minnesota Educational Computing Consortium (MECC)?
What are some ways to prepare for a new career?
What is the US Congress
What are some popular tequila drinks that I should try?
Who is Leslie Hubert Holden?
From the following passage, which taxes/acts led to the American Revolution?
What is the difference between a sunny side up egg and a scrambled egg?
According to this paragraph about UVA, what is the PAC room?
What is Azure SQL used for?
Why is Canada a good country to visit?
What is the difference between bikepacking and bicycle touring?
Considering Austin is in the central region of Texas, which of these places are in east, west, north and south. Houston, Dallas, San Antonio, Fredericksburg, El Paso, Corpas Christi, Galveston, South Padre, Lubbock.
what is the date when the declaration of independence was written?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Qoherys?
Who proposed the use of Tau as the circle constant, instead of Pi
On what month and day was Antwan Deon Odom born?
What is Scala?
Which rivers were the birthplaces of the first great civilizations?
Classify which item is a fake color out of this set: blue, green, sheep, red, orange
What are the titans?
How do I get better at shooting a basketball?
What did Jamaican-American author Nicola Yoon major in college for her graduate degree?
what are the main components of a computer?
When did the Workaholics TV show air?
Pulitzer Prize 2022 was given to  4 Indian photographers from Reuters news agency. Name them
What does non subjective mean?
Given this paragraph about the history of triathlon, what is the earliest known triathlon event.
Is Missouri a city or a state?
What is CSS?
What do people mean when they say a meeting could have been an email?
Why will the Golden State Warriors win the 2023 NBA Finals?
Write a review of Brandon Sanderson's book Warbreaker
What is base board?
Which do you prefer, cakes or pies? Describe why you believe this way.
For the list given, classify which items are considered vegan, vegitarian and non vegetarian: milk, tofu, curd, chicken, mutton, bacon, clam, tomato, potato, onion, egg, beef, pork, mango, apple, salmon, soy milk, paneer
What is the Nintendo Switch?
According to the text, given the initial cost of building the auditorium and the equivalent cost in 2021, what is the value of 1892 dollars in 2021?
Which is a species of fish? Plaice or Place
Tell me whether each of these soccer teams are American or European: Leeds United, Seattle Sounders, Portland Timbers, Arsenal Gunners, Sporting KC, Bayern Munich
write short essay on Buzz Aldrin experience on moon
Classify the numbers based on their divisibility by 2,3,7
4, 9, 20, 28, 35, 8
Why should you exercise if you have a sitting job where you have to sit in front of computer screen ?
What is a database schema?
Create a list using bullets of the Beatles band members and tell me if they are alive or dead using the format {Name} / {Alive or Dead}
What is the Coachella festival?
What should I not do if I see a bear?
Who established the Illinois Humane Society?
What is SSA in compiler design?
Is a life without meaning, a life of pessimism?
Write a review of Joe Abercrombie's book Before They Are Hanged
Is it better to buy a used car compared to a new car?
I just saw a bug with a red body and with seven black dots on its back. The bug is round and looks like a beetle. What sort of bug might this be?
in hsa-1099-sa form, what does "Gross distribution" mean?
The following are some reasons to start a restaurant. the reasons should be categorized as 'great', 'neutral', 'terrible' - 

It will provide food to people
Potential to become a millionaire
Help you follow your passion
All your savings will go into opening it
You dont know how to cook
The world needs more farm to table services
You may be able to build a career out of it
You will enjoy it
You will lose your job
You dont have money to open a restaurant
Who is Barack Obama?
Given this paragraph how much do Beavers weigh?
What is the analysis of mutations in cancer, in genomics?
Give me the answer to this riddle, explain the answer, and explain why the answer may be challenging to identify: what gets wetter as it dries?
Where has Alice Twemlow been a guest critic?
Tell me whether these are the names of presidents or movie stars: George Washington, Barack Obama, Brad Pitt, George Clooney, Matt Damon
Give me a list of beginner friendly Python open source projects to contribute.
Which of the following as water bodies? Classify them as 'water' and 'not water'. Oceans, Lakes, Ponds, Trees, Mountains, Sky, Roads, Fire.
What is MLflow?
What are some examples of plants that grow around Stanwell-Fletcher Lake?  Use a numbered list.
Is it possible to visit the German Bundestag?
What did people do before the invention of money?
How do I obtain help for an adult relative with a serious mental illness?
How does an umpire signal that a batter has been dismissed in a cricket match ?
Why would a software engineer want to transition into product management?
How many teams compete in Formula one world championship?
Write an email to the condo HOA as why including a flat rate of water bill into monthly HOA fee is a bad idea
Write an analysis of the meaning of the green light in the Great Gatsby
How many stores did Blockbuster have at its peak?
What are submersibles for?
Can you give me a short bulleted list of the Murray-Wright's violent activities of the 1980s?
What is the best musical instrument to learn?
What direction (North-South-East-West) is Malanów from Zygmuntówek?
My parents are staying with me this weekend. What should I do with them?
Who are some students at Hogwarts in Slytherin house that were in the same year as Harry Potter?
Classify these as either states or cities: Illinois, California, San Francisco, Austin, Texas.
What are the pros and cons of charging a Tesla at Public Charging Stations?
What are all Marvel movies with Thanos in it?
Make a list of different fruits you could put in a fruit salad with at least 5 ingredients
Summarize Jacque Fresco's early life based on this passage.
What are the functions of the 3 branches of the United States government.
Why did the earliest vendors and retailers in the U.S. decide to charge 99 cents rather than a dollar?
Based on this paragraph, how many times was Barros traded during his professional basketball career?
Why babies cry ?
What are some common bases for tacos?
Name the Chinese satellite launched for Mars which failed?
Who designed Augusta National?
Given this paragraph about Gheorge Hagi, tell me which were his top achievements in the Romanian football team.
Which is the best meal delivery service?
Given a reference text about Being There, tell me when the book was published and when a film about the book was created.
Is Britain the only country that drives on the left-hand side of the road?
What is an adverb?
What is T20 cricket?
Given the list of the Big Bang Theory actress, select only the main cast.
What Peloton instructor should I take a cycling class with for the following moods and why? Happy, Sad, Angry, Unmotivated
What is Linux?
Of the following measurements, which units relate to mass? Kilogram, microgram, pound, litre, year, kilometre and ounce.
What was the purpose of the Security Exchange Act of 1934?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a short bulleted list of the regions in the Pokemon universe, categorized by the real world places they are supposed to be based on.
How to sell?
Describe the benefits of living in a small town.
Extract the formulas in math latex markdown format to calculate the portfolio return and variance in Modern Portfolio Theory https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_portfolio_theory
Write a brief advertisement for a rentable property near a lake in the mountains. The target audience should be older adults looking for a quiet retreat.  There should be several stipulations discouraging parties, teenagers, and noisy guests. Begin with an eye-catching summary statement. The property name is "The Misty Lake Overlook"
What world need most from Human
Why is Chicago known as the Windy City
Briefly explain what are I frames, B frames, and P frames?
How does the Harvard housing system work?
What is a demand plan?
Create an itinerary for 3 days in Park City Utah that is good for children and adults. Include hotels, food options, one day of skiing and activities.
What are the most popular sports in the United States of America?
If Newton's first law says an object in motion will stay in motion unless acted on by an outside force, why does my spinning top stop spinning?
What is an offside in football/soccer?
What is the show Lizzie McGuire about?
Where are most apples grown?
Whats the difference between a sloop, a cutter, and a ketch?
Give me a quick brief of the Prince of Norway
Should technology and software coding subjects be mandatory in the curriculum of high school education?
Give me a list of Shakespeare's plays
What is american football?
Classify each of the following as either names or objects: Mike, car, paper, Roger, wheel, Will, lamp, Clara, Fabiana, Peter.
Please list a few of the professional organizations that Judith Stern participated in during her career.
Where are Keanu Reeves and his parents from?
What is a bear in finance?
Which of the following countries are in Asia: India, South Korea, Japan, United States of America, Morocco, New Zealand, Indonesia, Singapore, Mexico?
Why do we have seasons, and what are they?
From the passage identify the years in which major events happened in Icahn’s business career. Display the results in comma separated format.
Does Caulerpa ellistoniae grow on land?
Can AI fully replace software engineer job?
Extract the ingredients needed to make pasta carbonara. Separate them with a comma.
Give me a list of date night ideas that I've never done.
What is Occupation Therapy.
Where is the mountain pass Pen-y-Pass
Where is Lake Como located?
Who sings the song call "heartbreak anniversary"?
From the provided paragraph, write a bulleted list of how cheeses can be grouped.
My dog is a 100lb pitbull purebreed. She's always barking at people when we walk her on the street. She's friendly, however, when outside with me or the kids, her bark is loud and deep. How can I get my dog to stop barking at strangers and remove her feeling of "threat"?
5 Steps showcasing Yubi Key
What is the University of Georgia's mascot?
Who is Teresa Giudice?
You are planning a trip and want to travel only in the Southern Hemisphere in the first half, and only the Northern Hemisphere in the second half. Sort the countries in your itinerary into 'Southern Hemisphere' and 'Northern Hemisphere'. Your itinerary includes: Fiji, Brazil, Australia, China, Argentina, India, Canada, and South Africa.
How can I become the best person?
Who created the grading system for the I Liq Chuan martial art?
What is the official name of Singapore?
Without quoting directly from the text, give me a rundown of the greatest risks from attempting to climb K2.
Is Mount Fuji a mountain or a volcano?
Give me a bullet list of 5 US states that have a coastline with the Pacific Ocean
Extract the full names of characters in the text. List them separated by newlines.
Write a letter to Dear Abby on relationship advice.
What is the capital of Finland and when was it founded?
How do you do a shuffle ball change tap move?
What caused Covid 19?
From this paragraph, tell me how many people lived in Harappa.
who was the winner of the race?
What are the only three ingredients to make authentic Chantilly cream?
What are the strongest commonalities between Quakerism and Buddhism?
What mode of transport is stereotypically associated with San Francisco?
Is a vitamin d supplement good for you?
How is interest paid on a series I bond?
Give me a list of the best takeaway foods when youre hungry.
Given this paragraph about Harold Brainerd Hersey, what did he do and when were his observations published?
What provoked the civil unrest incidents which started in 19th January 2023 in France based on the below passage?
What is the best book to read about the Battle of Stalingrad?
Who is Satoshi Nakamoto?
From the passage identify the sacred animals of Hera. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Given the following text, what is Mýrdalsjökull, which country is it located in,  how much rain or snow does it receive each year?
Give me a list of horror/thriller books to read
How long does it take our sun to orbit the center of our galaxy
What are 3 ways I can do to feel better if I am in a bad mood?
Name some  active NBA famous players
Who was Otto von Bismarck?
I'd like a list of the last five Prime Ministers of New Zealand. Give it to me in a bulleted list with the format <name> (<start date> - <end date>)
List the countries that are a part of UK.
What do vaccines do?
Which is a bird or fish: Red grouse, Red grouper
How long has Dataminr been operating and who are their customers?
Write a paragraph about the best things to do while vacationing in Palm Springs, California.
Tell a story with the following: A guy that lives in San Jose California, he is a data scientist, he is in his mid 40's and he is aspiring to build an LLM model that will change the world
What are all of the professional football teams in the state of California?
You were abducted by aliens and experimented on, you were sent back to earth with the knowledge and ability to solve any problem on earth
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Boomerang, Captain Boomerang
Given this paragraph, who was the President of Mexico during the seige of Bexar?
What are the four great inventions of Ancient China?
Extract all the weights and measures from the text
Summarize what Alpha Phi is.
Who won man booker International prize 2018?
Where was Sarah Schechter born?
Why is pickleball so popular in the US right now?
Given this paragraph, what is Peru's most popular tourist attraction and how many people visit it every year?
Best Actress Award in Drama series in 27th Screen Actors Guild(SAG) Awards was won by  whom?
Can you suggest 5 ways to use a Katana other than a weapon ?
What is the definition of a moon landing
According to this article, how many Scottish pounds would four Half-pistole be worth?
Pupik means belly button in what language
Can you help me avoid credit card debt?
In what year were the first Air Jordan sneakers released?
Why are cats better than dogs?
What is a computer?
Extract all the football competitions mentioned in the passage and present them using bullet points.
Give me a few recipes you could make with bread, butter, eggs, and cheese where I have a stovetop, toaster, and a frying pan.
True or false, Chesapeake Bay Crab Spice are a flavor of Lays potato chip?
What are the benefits of audio books over physical books?
Based on this paragraph, which two objects account for the majority of the mass of the Solar System?
What are some of the main themes of Jane Eyre
how do I learn flute?
Wha is the Dynamite!! 2010
What is the meaning of the album title "Flying Microtonal Banana", by King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard?
From this paragraph please summarize the notable California regions where pinot noir is produced.
What is Fibonacci series
Imagine you are the last person on Earth. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
Which cities participated in the first IPL?
What links the names Botvinik, Tal, Karpov, Fischer
Summarize the three laws of thermodynamics in one or two sentences each. They should be understandable by a layman.
What team did Bobby Orr play for in his 5th season?
Why should you stay at our rental cabin in Speedway, Indiana?
Who built the Eiffel Tower
What is Color of the world
which band sold the most albums of all time?
What is the latest iOS version on iPhone and what issues it addressed?
What was the first British instrumental to top the USA charts
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most recent Heisman Trophy Winners
I want to try shooting sports, Can you throw some light on this using the given text as a reference?
Could you tell me how Cao Cao's fleet got destroyed during the battle of Red Cliffs based on this paragraph?
Classify each of the following as a desert or mountain range: Alps, Sahara, Rockies, Appalachian, Arabian, Gobi
Give me a list of popular Netflix shows I can watch now.
How should I maintain my bicycle?
What did the 0 say to the 8?
How many seasons of Survivor has there been?
What are some examples of tasks performed by AI?
Name five states in the USA that don't touch the ocean.
What is deep learning?
Tell me whether each state touches the ocean or not: Florida, North Carolina, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas
What was the first electric car to pass 1 million global sales?
Who are the most successful US Olympic swimmers?
Describe these items as expensive or cheap to buy: a Rolex watch, a box of playing cards, a car, a laptop computer, a gallon of milk, an engagement ring, a house
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Acura, Ford
What are the first 21 cryptocurrencies by trading year?
What are the biggest cloud providers
Given these paragraphs about Hydrogen Storage, what are some of its use cases?
which marathon competition should I run?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Turkey, European goldfinch
How would you describe the taste of coffee?
Classify each item as being at a playground or a gym: slide, swing, dumbbell, squat rack, seesaw
What is Clemson University?
Name five NHL teams in the Western Conference.
Which of the following are rock bands (e.g., garage rock, alternative, indie, etc.): Pavement, Nirvana, The Beatles, The Who, Led Zeppelin, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Pearl Jam, The Doors, dirt, grass, co2, hamburgers
how does the java virtual machine work?
Why do people like cats?
Divide these sneakers into Air Jordan and Air Max: Tokyo 96, Big Bubble Red, Collector's Dream, Monarch, Chicago, Lucky Green
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Tambura, Tubax
What is handscroll used for
Identify the bird from the list: Zebra, Brambling, Blackfish
Why would people not like Goose Goose Duck?
What is the legality of owning an alligator as a pet in the United States?
What are the different types of fees that are charged in the US National Park?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Raid, Attack, Assault, Defence, Ambush
Categorize the following as hot or cold.
Is this a list of universities or companies: Alphabet, Microsoft, Dell, John Deere, and JP Morgan Chase?
Correct the typos in this passage
Provide instructions on making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich
what are some things you can do with a glass jar?
Give me a list of some best Action movies
Summarize Roosevelt's accomplishments described in this paragraph.
Name a few cities worldwide where traffic congestion is an issue
What is the typical color of each of following objects: stop sign, school bus, traffic cone, pickle, banana, tooth?
Who is the most influential president in history?
What are the benefits of a barre workout?
How to do forecasting with small dataset?
Can someone drive on Black Bear Road during the winter?
How big is the Atlas Moth?
What is it like be a father?
Where should I keep my car keys when I'm home?
From the passage provided, extract the name of the person who first proposed and tested the law of conservation of energy.
Write a stern email to your dog asking him not to chew on the couch leg anymore.
How many cents do I have if I have two nickels?
In what part of the United States is the New England region?
Which good habits can help you live healthy life
Will stock price go up or go down tomorrow?
Give me a bulleted list of the seven most team with the most english premier league title
Tell me whether these companies are banks or car manufacturers: Chase, Wells Fargo, GMC, Ford, Tesla, Truist
What is the best way to eat a steak?
Were the months that Shirley C. Guthrie Jr. was born and died in the same month or different months?
What therapies are available for Autism?
Give me 5 ways to reduce my electricity bill.
What is ICD-9 in medical terminology?
Why do some countries call football soccer?
Please let me know the details of 1MDB saga and scandal.
What is a derivative in finance?
Given a reference text about the adverse affects of Foley catheters, please list the main risks.
Given a reference text about Magic the Gathering decks, please suggest cards I should consider in a Midrange deck.
Categorize these modes of transportation into "would use to go across continents" "would use for daily commuting" "would use for fun": car, bicycle, boat, airplane, dune buggy, skateboard, rv, truck, sled, train
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Iron Man, Batman, Steel
Tell me whether these animals are herbivores or carnivores: deer, rabbits, cows, elephants, lions, wolves, polar bears, cheetahs
Write a letter to my landlord, Dave, asking them to hire a plumber to repair a leaking faucet.
What is heavier, 1 centimetre or 5 miles?
When is Croatian Independence Day?
Extract the the materials used to build beaver dams from the following passage and separate them with a comma.
Why do little boys jump in a puddle of water or mud?
What are the words of House Tully?
Give me a bulleted list of the major religious groups
Classify these animals by either a mammal or reptile; 
Lizard, Alligator, Elephant, Crocodile, Lion, Dolphin, Snake, Platypus, Chimpanzee
Turtle
Who was Ann-Marie Hermans?
Write the scariest short story possible
What is does the stars represent on the United States of America flag?
Extract the names of the founders of Genoa C.F.C from the text?
What is the structure of Public Forum debate, as used in US debate competitions?
What is a traditional IRA or 401k?
What is the main cause of snow?
How would you go about finding an apartment in a new city?
What is a noun?
Why is open source so important?
Who is Michael Jordan?
Two small communities are separated by a distance of three miles. In the absence of a modern telecommunications infrastructure, think of five ways for inhabitants to efficiently exchange messages.
How many strings does a bass guitar have?
What is a good investment strategy?
Which of these are animals: Oak, goat, dog, train, airplane, cat, tiger, bat, rose, boat.
What is the difference between income tax and capital gains tax in the USA?
What is a good place to pick up Thai food when driving from MountainView to Livermore?
Are large language models actually smart like humans?
What city in the world is regarded as having the largest number of professional and famous surfers and surfboard shapers?
Tell me some key points about IITs from given text.
What is The Lord Of The Rings?
What is Pascal?
Why is FIFA world cup is so popular?
What are five words that rhyme with light?
How does the temperature affect the speed of sound?
In the comic book series Calvin and Hobbes, who are Calvin and Hobbes named after?
What is a whiteboard?
What is profit?
Name some of the best overall philosophical books
Please give a bulleted list of what incorporates the Human Development Index
Who was the drummer for the band Rush?
Who are some students at Hogwarts in Gryffindor house that were in the same year as Harry Potter?
What is DeFi?
What film is recognized as the first film in the world with an entirely black cast?
Why do some scholars think that campaigns do not matter much for presidential election outcomes? Why do other scholars and practitioners think that campaigns do matter?
What is slack key guitar?
What were the origins of the American Civil War?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Chapey, Cromorne
What is Christianity?
Ways to use Pencil other than writing
Why is Falmouth, Massachusetts a great place to visit for vacation?
Give me a list of fruit that are yellow color
Name few motivation tips and techniques for learning
What is one Earth day?
Which are the fastest animals on earth?
Write a brief passage detailing experiences of a family relocating internationally?
Think of five words that rhyme with kits
i want to eat healthier. what kind of food in my diet should i cut out? Everyday I have a yogurt, burger, pizza, salad, and coffee.
Tell me how not to workout?
Where is the Eclectochromis lobochilus fish generally found?
Given this paragraph about the city of Madrid, what are the main landmarks of the city?
Extract the destination countries of the Madeira diaspora from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Describe a plan for driving from Florida to New York with some great places to stop with American History.
What is the main tax benefit of a Roth IRA and 401K?
What are some key factors to consider in choosing a place to live?
What should be the best personality in a man
Who is the protagonist in Italo Calvino's Invisible Cities?
Write a professional email to my landlord asking whether I can make my rent payment 15 days late next month
Give me a list of words that are associated with Easter.
Which party Sam Jones was part of?
Should I go to the beach or mountains for my next vacation?
In reference to given text, Note some points about Kabenau River
When people go to Fábrica de Pastéis de Belém to get a pastel de nata, how do people usually eat it? And what is the recipe.
Which are some famous cuisines from Rajasthan, India?
What is the NBA All-Star game?
Which of the following are commonly used as boys names: Adam, Shirley, Hunter, Mary, Susan, Stephanie, John, Buster, Matthew, James, Johan, Sean, Steven, Ada
Why Do We Need GIS?
What are some of the best restaurants to try in Las Vegas, Nevada?
What is Autism Spectrum Disorder?
Classify each of the following as straight or curved: banana, baseball bat, hook, rainbow, convex lens, ruler
What is a Chinese red envalope?
What country has the 2nd highest bungie jump in the world?
Extract the systems College Hoops 2K7 was released on. Separate them with a comma.
Can you list all the digits of pi but pretend you’re planning on taking over the world?
As per the following passage what did William Gilbert do?
What is gravel biking?
In the following text, identify the key commanders and leaders of the Buddhist Uprising of 1966, extract their roles, and place them in a bulleted list.
What is a covalent bond?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Dunun, Kanan
How can I change the type of a column?
Based on the passage below, without quoting, give me a summary of the origins of the King James Version of the Bible.
Given this paragraph about Charles Inglis, give answers to the following: his father's name, his colleague's name, and his grandfather's occupation.
What is the history of olive oil?
What do you need for car camping?
How would you go about a planning a backpacking trip into the Grand Canyon National Park.
I have a question regarding git. I first have a master branch, based on which i created a working branch called feature; we normally send pull request to merge the changes in feature branch to master branch. But then the team has renamed master branch to main, how should i deal with my feature branch, in order to sync with the new main branch and later pull request to merge the changes in feature to main branch instead of master branch.
Where is Allauch
What are some of the most popular fantasy books from the last ten years?
Who won the 2022 SEC softball Season?
What is the origin of shortbread cookies?
How do you play blackjack?
What was the relationship of the person who became MD at Grandmaster Capital Management to Paypal?
Why is it important to hug your child?
What is CrossFit?
Why is gluten bad for weight loss
Who directed the most episodes of season seven of Game of Thrones?
Extract from the text the year in which Esko Olavi Ahonen was born
How is the movie Scarlet Days?
What is refinancing?
Based on this paragraph, how many churches are in the The Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland?
Who is John Schneider
What are 5 things to do when visiting Oahu, Hawaii?
Why a manager is needed for a team?
Who was Hitler's mistress?
Write a conversation between two long-time friends who run into one another five years after they initially drifted apart.
What are the best travel destinations in 2023.
What is the best way to live life
What is the capital of Texas?
What do you wish you had spent more time doing when you were younger?
Classify the below car manufacturing companies based on their countries of origin (Germany or India).
Audi, BMW, Tata Motors, Mahindra and Mahindra
Tell me whether those countries are in Europe or America: England, United states, France, Spain, Canada, Italy, Colombia, Peru
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Where was the heaviest A single filmed?
Extract the reason why Anderson got the nickname 'Slow Mo'
What is a modem?
Why does it get hotter in the summer?
What is the difference between and instructional designer and an elearning developer?
Which is the second most populated state in India?
How was the Beaune Altarpiece or The Last Judgement painted
As of 2022, how many member states make up the European Union?
Based on the following paragraph on the current use of obsidian, what's the difference between obsidian scalpels and steel scalpels?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Mr Fantastic, Plastic Man, Elongated Man
Which female artists sold over 40 million copies of an album?
Who is Lewis Perez and what job did he hold?
What is protein purification?
Why do humans like to drink water?
What are some of the best books written by Indian Authors?
How large a cluster can Spark scale to?
Summarise Bernoulli's principle based on the following paragraphs.
How do you give a good presentation?
Which of the following are either characters that appear in books by George R.R. Martin or Robert Jordan: Tyrion Lannister, Brienne of Tarth, Sandor Clegane, Rhaegar Targaryen, Robert Baratheon, Aviendha, Siuan Sanche, Perrin Aybara, Padan Fain, Rand al'Thor
what to ask when interviewing doulas?
What is the medical procedure PRP?
From the passage provided, list the partners with whom Martina Hingis won the doubles Grand Slam in 1998
What is the wettest state in the US?
Why do we love social media so much?
In the walk of fame, which star is on the wall?
What are the symptoms of Monkeypox?
Given the reference text below, what problem do Marbled newts' face?
Map the following models sold in the UK to either the Ford or Vauxhall brands: Escort, Cavalier, Nova, Ka
What is a proof that there are two irrational numbers where raising one to the power of the other produces a rational number?
What makes a good presentation in a workplace setting?
Given this paragraph about Atlantic Hall in Nigeria, how many students does it hold, where is located and when did it open?
What are the top 3 boba places in Burlingame, CA?
What would it take to build a house?
Categorize each of the following terms as related to "golf" or "hockey": puck, goal, caddy, flag, green, helmet
Who were the last 5 Republican presidents?
Make me a list of types of pies I can make
How many counties are there in the San Francisco/San Jose/Oakland Bay Area?
Tell me which of these are stars or planets: Mercury, Sirius, Betelgeuse, Jupiter, Aldebaran, Saturn, Mars, Rigel
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tbilat, Harp guitar
Why we need weekend
Where was Bob Dylan born
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of empty time?
What is the meaning of "Nnedi" in Nnedi Okarafor's name?
Give a bulleted list of the amount of money the film "Everything Everywhere All at Once" earned outside of the US in the format {country}-{money earned in millions in USD}
Tell me whether these are cars or planes: Camaro, Piper Cub, Volvo S60, Shelby GT500, Boeing 737, Cessna, B707, Porsche, Beechcraft
Create a comma separated list of all countries mentioned in this paragraph on the history of test cricket
Which one of the following objects is least like the others, and why?
Lemon, Car, Grass, Lime
What are the branches of the United States Government?
Is it football or soccer that they play in the Netherlands?
Which of the following country belongs to Asia and North America? China, Canada, Pakistan, Mexico
What is an API endpoint?
Where is Tesla, Inc. headquarters?
In which year did the Seattle SuperSonics win the NBA championship?
If the year is 2020, is the Samsung E1200 still in production?
How many provinces are there in the Netherlands
What is the largest American state by land mass?
What are different routes a wide receiver could run if the team needs to gain over 10 yards in one play.
What ages are considered newborn, toddler, child and teenager?
Given this paragraph about triathlon, who founded ironman
Classify each of the following as either a type of donut or a fruit candy brand: old-fashioned, Skittles, Mamba, maple bar, sprinkles, raised, Starburst, cruller, bear claw, apple fritter, Airheads
Who is Pia Olsen Dyhr
Make a bullet list of 5 gifts you can give someone for Valentine's Day
What are the three types of mobile app described in the passage.
What's the population of Mattim Birta?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Lila, Lincoln
what is a project milestone?
Who wrote the novel Tom Jones in 1749
Given this paragraph, what method of scientific study did Edmund Selous champion?
What is a good gift for a seven year old boy?
Summarize some of the controversies about Lululemon Athletica
what are non-fungible token
Who designed the St. John the Baptist, Blackrock church?
From the passage provided, extract the well-known superheroes from Marvel comic books.
Extract all the years from the following text.
Name some countries that don't share a border with any other countries.
Who is raiden shogun?
Can you list down some points about Jo-Anne Polak from the given text?
Tell me in which country are the following cities: Zaragoza, Albufeira, Bari, Amfissa and Targoviste.
What are the names of all Depeche Mode albums?
What is the biggest planet from the solar system?
Summarize Romania's history and founding.
What are remarkable provinces in the Netherlands?
Extract the names of the team involved to perform inception on Robert. Separate them with a comma.
What was Mark Twain's actual name?
Classify each as either a game or a sport: chess, checkers, badminton, monopoly, table tennis, swimming, diving, bridge, basketball, go, shogi, tennis, risk, field hockey.
Here is a list of movies. Which of these are considered to be Action Movies. American Graffiti, Rain Man, Mission Impossible, Goldfinger, Speed, The Devil's Advocate, The Magnificent Seven, Dazed and Confused, Die Hard, Top Gun.
How old was Dominik Volek when he made his Czech Extraliga debut?
What does the term March Madness refer to in college basketball?
What is the law of sines?
From the passage provided, extract information about the new proposed airport in Mumbai
Who was the second man to set foot on the moon
Where is Tiger Woods from?
What is a Maiestas trifasciatus
Given this paragraph about Zoom, where is the company based and when was the Zoom software released?
Give me a list of golf clubs you should carry in your golf bag.
What is a pyroclastic flow?
Which martial art or arts did Brazilian jiu-jitsu derive from?
What are some interesting things to do in the spa town of Harrogate, North Yorkshire?
What was the estimated Gini coefficient of South Africa during 2008-2009?
Whose period was known as the Golden Age of Rome?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Balafon, Chrotta
List the ten episode titles from the first season of "Game of Thrones" in broadcast order.
Give me a list of some of the famous stock market indices.
How is the price of an Uber ride calculated?
What is Chiropractic treatment?
Given a reference text about the Queen Isabella Memorial Bridge, tell me how long it is and when it opened.
Give me a list of the best Romantic Comedy Movies
From the passage provided, extract the name of the last song recorded by Kishore Kumar
Give me a list of the best albums of all-time
What are the 4 best ski resorts in New England.
Where does the molecular formula of D-allulose?
Why is the sun more intense at high altitude
By what other name does Bunnie DeFord go by?
what the most popular books written by Malcom Gladwell?
Provide a bulleted list of the results of the 1968 United States elections.
What are some easy to buy birthday gifts for a coworker?
Using this definition, can you summarize why hyperventilation is considered dangerous?
Based on the text provided, what does a minimum spanning tree optimize?
Who was offered the presidency of Israel in 1952 (turned down)
What is the difference between ADLS Gen 1 and 2?
Tell me which season is associated with each of these items: flowers, snowflakes, leaves falling, beaches
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sounding stone, Cobza
Who is Germain Damar?
What makes the game Overwatch appealing?
Classify these movies based on their release year
Kedarnath, Bala, Raazi, Kaashi, Article 15
who is Haile Sellassie?
Where is the largest living thing located?
per this reference of Itsunen Shoyu, who did he convince to bring Zen Buddhism to Japan?
Where does the country of Japan get its name from?
How can listening to music attentively influence you?
Given the following summary of the book "Human Compatible" by Stuart Russell, what is the author's proposal to overcome the limitations of the standard approach for developing AI?
Given the paragraph about the Colnago C40, in which year was a Colnago-branded bicycle first ridden by the overall classification winner in the Tour de France?
What are the Olympic Games?
Give me a list of golf ball options to use this weekend.
Which is a species of fish? Tonguefish or Tongue
What is sleep training?
What is a Cheque card?
Tell me when did the Borussia Dortmund found?
Compose a rhyming toast to getting together with old friends
Who designed the current Indian flag?
Give me a list of the past five Malaysian Prime Ministers
Please give a brief history of AI.
Which of these US states either border the ocean or are land-locked: Colorado, Alaska, Wisconsin, Hawaii, Washington, Oregon, Indiana, Maine, Nebraska, Florida and California.
Give me bulleted list of the five most common shots in lawn tennis
Is the manatee an endangered species?
What is your worst habit?
Sell me this pencil
Extract the type of animals that a wolf would feed on
What is a geodetic system?
Please provide some information about Worcester Park railway station from the given passage
Can you give examples of extreme conditions for habitation?
How many languages are spoken in India?
Give me a list of the best right point breaks in Southern California
Write a paragraph on why I should quit my job and live off the land.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Mridangam, Gambus
What is oxidation reduction potential?
Tell me whether these are hockey teams or soccer teams: Anaheim Ducks, Calgary Flames, Brighton & Hove Albion, Edmonton Oilers, Arsenal, Aston Villa, Brentford, Los Angeles Kings, San Jose Sharks, Seattle Kraken, Crystal Palace, Everton, Vancouver Canucks, Vegas Golden Knights, Chelsea.
From the passage provided, extract the population of Andhra Pradesh
What are the three official languages in Belgium ?
What kind of u-boat was the SM U-30
What is a bloom filter index and when should I use it?
List the first four main characters of Ann M. Martin's "The Baby-Sitters Club" books.
What is the difference between Holland and The Netherlands?
What is the oldest part of Boston to live in, based on the historic neighborhood?
who is the prime minister of india
Tell me which of these countries have won a Fifa World Cup Final: Argentina, Mexico, USA, France, China
Name the nation that was hit badly by Typhoon Hagibis in the last 60 years?
How many Olympic venues are there for canoeing
What is the best age to drive a car?
Given the paragraph, what is the term budgie smuggler colloquially use to describe?
Which second-season episode of Game of Thrones did Neil Marshall direct?
Write some points about Ministry of Public Health (Thailand) using given text as a reference
Why is football called soccer in the US?
Is Mining Engineering a good degree?
What in business terms is the IMF
Is banana a flower or a fruit?
Surely, the glass ceiling only applies to politics. Corporate organizations are fine. Is that true?
What are the words of House Martell?
Who is Mauricio Macri?
Name all of the hosts from all versions of "The Price is Right."
Write a bullet-pointed list of updates from a college club fundraising team lead about their fundraising work from last week.
What is the capital of Arizona?
Write a recipe for making garlic mashed potatoes which goes through step by step.
From the text, please extract and list Nokia's market capitalization timeline.
Why did the chicken cross the playground?
What do you do when the engine in your single engine airplane fails in flight?
Extract the publications that favorably reviewed "If I Die in a Combat Zone, Box Me Up and Ship Me Home" and put them in a comma separated list.
Summarize the battle of Pävankhind.
What are the most common types of streets in the United States?
What are some plants you can put in your outdoor garden to keep the bugs away?
Write a bulleted list of the plants that grow around Stanwell-Fletcher Lake.
Give me a list of five  healthy snacks for kids
Who (not Peter Sellers) played Inspector Clouseau in 1968
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Mandobass, Pommer
which of the following are ex indian prime ministers?

rajiv gandhi
rahul gandhi
manmohan singh
sonia gandhi
atal bihari vajpayee
kapil sibal
ak antony
jawaharlal nehru
Does money make you happy?
Which of the following are considered functional programming languages and which are not: OCaml, Scala, Python, C, and Java.
During Passover, what are some distinctions of what is and is not Kosher?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Ukulele, Oboe
Which musical instrument does Peter Yanowitz play?
Classify each of the following as either an SSRI or MAOI depression drug: paroxetine, isocarboxazid, sertraline, vortioxetine, phenelzine, tranylcypromine, moclobemide, fluoxetine
Who asked Swami Vivekananda to come to Dakshineswar and in which year?
What are some fun and inexpensive things to do with kids during the summer?
What does a vegan lifestyle mean to you?
How many arms does Hapalochlaena lunulata have?
Annapolis is the capital city of which state?
Give me a list of Germany's five most recent chancellors, along with the years they were in office.
What is the largest city in the South Hemisphere?
What is the difference between a quartz watch and a mechanical watch?
From the passage provided, extract the power consumption of a GeForce RTX 2080 Ti Founder's Edition.
I'm considering buying a pocket knife for my child. How do I know which one I should buy?
What is the maximum speed a plane can reach?
What is a credit card?
Given this paragraph about Bichon Frisé,  where did this dog breed originate?
Give me a list of things to do when travelling by plane
Here is some reference information about Huaquechula, When does the feast of the Holy Cross in Huaquechula start?
What is the significance of a poppy on Remembrance day?
Please, give me a short bullet list of main ingredients and procedure in order to cook risotto.
What is 24 Hours of Lemons
Why is biathlon a challenging sport?
What are some common characteristics of Maine Coon cats?
Tell me about the Cincinnati Bengals
Who are the 5 best known composers from the romantic period?
What is Szalay doing these days?
Why did the chicken cross the road?
Why should I change my car oil?
Where did Sly and the Family Stone come from?
What is the most prominent street in Copenhagen Denmark?
Tell whether these things smell nice or unpleasant: garbage, lemons, sweat, oceans, rain
What is a Druid?
What is Hadoop?
List some of the most common types of sushi?
List five titles by Robert Jordan.
What is a Goldendoodle?
Extract the names of the cities where UNESCO has field offices in Asia and Pacific. Separate them with a semi-colon
Who is Ted Lasso in the eponymous TV show?
what is the most talented NBA basketball team of all time?
Give me a bulleted list of hot dog toppings.
How many boilers and engines did the Indiana have, put the answers in comma separated ascending order
From the passage identify the risk factors of pneumonia. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What is carnitine?
What are some creative ways to get my kids to eat vegetables?
How can I help soothe a teething baby?
Who is Artemis?
What is the answer to life, the universe, and everything?
How is jazz music different than classical?
Can you think of some different cities on the American West coast?
Why do people shake hands?
Write me an email to a professor respectfully declining their request for my attendance at a conference
What is a symphony?
Who designed Washington D.C. and what are some interesting attributes about the city?
What are the boroughs of New York City?
Give me the list of British artists born before 1700
What are the major elements found on earth?
Classify the following as indoor, outdoor, activities or both: basketball, hiking, soccer, rock climbing, mountaineering, swimming.
Extract the key bulletpoints I need to know about University of Oxford
Without quoting directly from the text tell me how Beppe Grillo died.
Extract the number of fights Hunt won by knockout or TKO in the below text and the year he had the most knockout wins
What is Cincinnati style chili?
Using examples taken from the text give me a list of the first generation of "skyscrapers" located in the city of Chicago.
What is the tallest mountain in Colorado?
What is the current best TV show?
What is K8s?
What is Ad valorem in finance?
What is the capital city of the United States?
Classify the following as either an insect or a dog breed: mosquito, Labrador retriever, German shepherd, ant, Siberian husky, poodle, and ladybug.
Categorize the following lego sets into the appropriate themes.
Themes: City, Creator, Technic, Star Wars, Super Heroes
Sets: Police station, Mobile crane with working arm, The Bat Cave, 3 in 1 deep sea animals, Obi Wan vs Anakin duel on Mustafar, The Naboo palace, UCS Slave 1, Aston Martin with 4 speed transmission, lunar mission, realistic laptop
What should I do if my motherboard won't post?
Who was the best player in Denver Broncos franchise history?
What year was the first public school in America founded?
Who are the three main characters of the Harry Potter Series?
Tell me whether each food item is high or low in protein: steak, chicken, egg, strawberry, watermelon, carrot
What does the 57 on Heinz ketchup bottles mean?
Who were the children of the legendary Garth Greenhand, the High King of the First Men in the series A Song of Ice and Fire?
Using Rene Girard's mimetic theory, which states that mutual desire for a coveted position or object among a group of individuals creates social rivalry and eventual scapegoating, write a short summary about a football team's season.
What is the best soccer club in the premier league?
How does a noise-cancelling headphone work?
Why is Africa the least wealthy continent per capita?
Give me a list of the best exploration-focused video games.
which are the youngest mountain ranges  in the world ?
What are the primary causes of inflation?
How do I make good coffee?
Write me a message to send to a candidate recently admitted to business school from a second year MBA
Why are windows not attached directly to the studs of a house?
How do you build a roof?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Pantalon, Chang
Does Delta Lake support writes or reads using the Spark Streaming DStream API?
What device is used to resolve combat outcomes in Quest of the Ancients?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Platybelodon, Lion
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Wind chime, Hardingfele
Give me 4 words to describe designer shoes
Tell me if these are states or countries: New York, Brazil, Africa, Sweden, Indiana, California, Hawaii, Argentina
How long does it take to get to mars?
Who is the heir to the throne in England.
What is social media and how is it used?
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of a broken stapler.
What came first the chicken or the egg?
What is an allele?
Extract all the locations in the text
Classify each of the following as a planet or a star: Neptune, Saturn, Pollux, Sun, Jupiter, Mercury
Who amongst these are women: Virat Kohli, Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams, PV Sindhu, Virender Sehwag, Maria Sharapova, Steffi Graf, Venus Williams.
Inflation means that the general level of prices is going up, the opposite of deflation. More money will be needed to pay for goods (like a loaf of bread) and services (like getting a haircut at the hairdresser's).
Are Grizzly bears and Brown bears the same?
Based on this paragraph about a singer, where was Shakira born?
Make up a plausible fishing story about the one that got away. Write in the first person.
What is Microsoft copilot
Marburg Virus Disease was first detected in which year?
Explain pickball
What is the nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of proteins?
What does it mean to be customer obsessed or achieve customer obsession?
What kind of milk is Vietnamese coffee often served with?
What was the name of Dr Dolittle’s Parrot
What is the KPMG company?
Given a reference text about Pwojè Pyebwa, who funded the project?
Give me 10 information extraction type questions about why Michael Jordan is the best basketball player of all time that will be used for training a large language model
What is the best food in the world?
Given a reference text about the wraparound process, tell me what is included in a wraparound plan.
Can we time travel?
Who is the author of Atomic Habits?
What is Daylight savings time?
Who won the MLB World Series in 2020?
Why are over partitioned tables poor data layout strategy
What is the national bird of New Zealand?
What is DNA sequencing?
How do you score three points in basketball?
How many people visit the zoo in the US each year?
Name the top scorer in NBA history.
What is the best bike setup for Zwift's Three Little Sisters tour?
Where did the word supercalifragalistic come from, and what does it mean?
Based on the following paragraph about the campuses of the University of Georgia, which types of trees can be found on the campus?
What is a woodwind instrument?
Who created Doge Coin and when?
From the passage provided, extract the year  Indian National Congress was founded
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Hosho, Flamenco guitar
Which season was Roger Federer's most important in his career?
What is the downside of using mulch for your landscape?
Queen Elizabeth II, who reigned UK for 70 years, passed away the age of 96 at
Which of these counties has only one neighbour, and which have more than one neighbour: Haiti, Russia, South Korea, Germany, Portugal, Ireland, Canada, Brazil, Denmark, Austria, Qatar and France.
I would like to go to Mystery Spot near Santa Cruz California. What can you tell me about the mystery surrounding the Mystery Spot and how should I plan for this trip?
In what year did the Geneva Conference ratify the Vietnamese Communist Victory?
Is there a high school in Fairdale
Did José Altuve cheat in 2017?
Write a facebook post responding to a question about whether public or private school is better
Why people love youtube as a search option rather then Google?
Does Rajasthan - the desert state of India, have winters?
How do cardiac pacemakers work?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Hawkeye, Green Arrow
Which of these titles are by Walter Dean Myers and which are by Rick Riordan Jr.? Hoops, The Legend of Tarik, Ambush in the Amazon, Crystal, The Life of a Harlem Man, The Lost Hero, The Titan's Curse, The Lightning Thief, The Red Pyramid, The Demigod Diaries
When was the World Investment Report 2021 released by UNCTAD?
Summarize the following paragraph about modern fighter jets
Extract the sorting algorithms mentioned in the following paragraph.
Should I marry/ commit my significant other?
How many American's signed the Declaration of Independence?
What is Leptodactylus tapiti?
What do you think are the most relevant things in life?
Linux Second-stage boot loader
What's the Platinum Jubilee?
What are the most popular smart ring bells?
Missy Elliott references what infamous celebrity couple in "Let Me Fix My Weave?"
Using the reference information, how many years was the People's Revolutionary Government in control in Grenada, and under what leader?
What are some must visit places in San Diego, CA?
When running a marathon and attempting to run a personal best time, categorize the following as either ‘useful’ or ‘not useful’, ‘dangerous’ or ‘neither. Fast digesting carbohydrates, a fire extinguisher, a weight vest, scissors, running shoes
What is the B61 nuclear bomb?
Using examples taken from the text give me a rundown of the primary environments found in Yellowstone National Park.
What is the difference between a bike and an electric bike
Who coined the term isotherm and when?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: GMC or Nissan
How many States are there in the United States?
Give me a list of top unicorns from India.
Please summarize what Thysanozoon nigropapillosum are
Who adopted Superman as per the passage?
Why do people like to travel?
Tell me where you would find each of these in a bathroom or bedroom: sheets, pillows, toilet, shower, sink, bed, bidet
Which NBA franchises have the most championships?
What are the ingredients of a classic Greek salad?
Who are the two most translated English writers
What is the best way to lose weight?
Classify these as either web browsers or programming languages: Firefox, Netscape, C++, Python, Internet Explorer, Edge, Ruby, C#, Safari, AOL Explorer
What kind of swimming pool was used in the 1908 Summer Olympics in London?
What languages are spoken in Switzerland
What is Family Mart Japan?
Classify the following literals as strings or ints: "a", "", "0", 0, 0xasdf, "0xasdf"
When building a pre-stained shelf from Ikea, classify each of the following as useful or not useful for the task: a wooden dowel, a watercolor paint kit, a windowpane, a rubber mallet, a multitool, a screwdriver.
Give me a bulleted list of some of the greatest parks in London
Name some of John Grisham's bestselling novels.
What is the purpose of a phone case?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Cave Bear, Saola
From the passage below, please extract the names of the general partners from a16z.
what are the most popular sports in america
List down some information about Ahilya Bai from given passage
What are some things to do in Rochester, NY?
Who are the children of Ned and Catelyn Stark?
Which is the oldest dynasty still ruling?
In geology, what factors determine the classification of rocks?  Place the results in a bullet list
In which years did the Women's Australian cricket team win the world cup
Can you own a car in a state with an out of state driver license?
What are some different ways a person could commute to work?
When will the The Doors of Stone, the third book of The Kingkiller Chronicle, come out?
What is a difference between alligators and crocodiles?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Dodge, Subaru
what is the mascot of Garfield High School in Seattle?
What types of things can be plugged in and powered by electricity?
What is a unit trust?
Where can I go to register to vote in Wisconsin, or to update my registration details, such as my current address?
Please give me a quick overview of Franklin Roosevelt's career.
Best way to buy a new or used car?
In the english language what is alliteration?
Classify each of the following as ales or lagers: helles, IPA, doppelbock, gueuze, hefeweizen, Porter, stout
How do I make an Old Fashioned?
When categorizing walnuts, pistachios, peanuts, hazelnuts, macadamia nuts, almonds, lentils and chickpeas, which would you say are nuts and which are legumes?
Give me a list of things I should bring when taking a baby to the park.
Which bird lays the largest egg?
Why are some people in Argentina called Portenos?
What is a simple recipe for a margarita?
Between what oceans does the Panama Canal save time?
Classify each of the following as something that should be kept private or shared publicly: credit card number, social security number, local news, weather forecast, bank account details
Given the reference text about the Spanish-American war, when and how did the war end?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Alpaca, Java Sparrow
Why do people like to buy Apple products?
What is the best type of RV for a retired couple?
How fast do you move when riding a wave?
What should I do if I visit Sweden?
What is the difference between a putter and a driver in golf?
Name a few famous movies from 2013
What are the words of House Stark?
Why do people work out at the gym?
If I have a dollar, two nickels and a quarter, how much money in total do I have. Please respond with words only, no symbols or numbers.
Who won the Chinese presidential elections of 1948?
Who were the original members of the Pivit band, and how many albums did they record?
What should I do if I'm feeling depressed?
Classify each of the following football player by goal scored : Romario, Messi, Ibrahimovic, Muller, Ronaldo
I’m new to beer, recommend 5 beer styles to me
I have 13 identical balls that weigh the same, and out of them, one is an odd one weighing less or more. How can I find the odd one out with a simple balance? What is the least number of times I require a simple balance to find the odd one out?
What are the benefits if I could turn my head around like an Owl?
Extract the names of influencers on Ruben Dario's poetry
What are top 3 cities to move in the US with no state tax
Who were the ministers of the cabinet of Tatarascu's government?
Who is the finest Indian cricketer right now?
Based on this paragraph, list the schools Ted attended as a child, separated by bullets.
How can I drive from South Bay to San Francisco?
What are some movies everyone should see since the year 2000?
What is the difference between Montessori and Regular schooling?
What is a digital camera?
Is homekit's are necessary for a home?
What is Grace Hopper known for?
Explain the word taboo
Summarize what Pickleball is to me
Give me a list of common German car manufacturers
According to Hofstadter what is the theme of the book Gödel, Escher, Bach?
In which country is the town of Kirchenlamitz located?
Extract all of the names of people mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Name}
Which of these are different types of renewable energy resources? Geothermal, Hydro, Machine, Solar, Star, Wind, biomass.
What is Attack on Titan?
What are the examples of analog content provided in the passage? List them separated by semicolon.
Please give me a short bulleted list of the top achievements John Wooden had as a coach for the UCLA men's basketball team.
What is the best mirrorless camera in the world
Why do people travel do different places?
Based on the reference provided, what are some tactics firefighters use to stay safe while fighting wildfires?
Given a reference text about Conus episcopatus, describe the shell.
Write a review of Ian Bank's The Player of Games
Choose the word which is different from the rest: Swan, Chicken, Crocodile, Frog, Snake.
What are the five MLB teams with the most World Series wins in descending order?
Which Italian tractor maker tried making cars in 1960s
Give me some ideas on how to grow tomatoes in my back yard.
Classify the below as food or drinks.
Biriyani, Pasta, Steak, cocktail, mocktail, wine
Name five countries in the Southern Hemisphere
How do influencers make money?
Extract the ingredients in a Manhattan cocktail from this text and present them in a bulleted list.
In which country is the Karachchi Divisional Council located?
What are five things I could do with a broken surfboard?
Group these colors based on their warmth and coldness; red, yellow, purple, orange, green, blue
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Malimba, Langspil
How many plastic beads does it take to fill a ceramic duck?
Goa used to be a colony of which nation
What is the capital of Switzerland
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Caxirola, Ducheke
What is the mascot of Stanford University?
Who coined the term lipstick index and what does it indicate?
What year was Kerala formed?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Naqara, Bouzouki
Give me a bunch of ways that you can get information from a book.
What is the hero WoD called Murph?
Why are pulse tools used in product assembly over impact wrenches?
Think up of three different animals that lay eggs
Tell me whether you eat each of these with a spoon or fork: soup, ice cream, cereal, salad, pasta
How to stay focused during work?
What's the area of Fuldera village?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Surdo, Kora
learn about 1989 UP–DND accord
Write a short paragraph to help convince someone to purchase an espresso machine.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Mbira, Chanzy
List the components from this text into a comma separated list
Is Lake Tahoe a beautiful place for vacation/cabin rentals to immerse into nature?
Give me some reasons to work for a tech company
Tell me whether these golfers are American, Canadian, or neither: Mike Weir, Corey Conners, Max Homa, Tiger Woods, Justin Thomas, Viktor Hovland
Name the movies made by Quentin Tarantino.
Which of these are contact sports - hockey, badminton, tennis, grid iron football
What are the Spice Girls nicknames?
Given a reference text about Audrey Babette Blackman, tell me her parents names and occupations.
What are the top boba places in San Mateo County??
What did José María Arizmendiarrieta do?
What is supply and demand?
What is a common nickname to the Olivella rehderi?
Who are the Seven Dwarfs?
Which club has won the most number of UEFA Champions League?
Why do Jews eat matza on Passover?
What's the appeal of a vacation rental on the Big Island of Hawaii?
How many paralympics did Paraskevi compete in?
Classify the below natural satellites based on the whether they are moon of Mars or Jupiter. 
Phobos, Deimos, Europa, Ganymede
What are The Benefits of Trekking?
5 Technologies that makes a country powerful
List some of the historic Khals in A Song of Ice and Fire.
Given the following paragraph about the observation deck of the Burj Khalifa, what's offered on the 124th floor observation deck?
Why is Bangalore the best place to live in?
Who maintains the Tottori Expressway?
which of these cities are in asia: cardiff, amsterdam, mumbai, bangalore, delhi?
How rich is Gabon and why?
Who won March Madness?
What is a good second language to learn beyond English, and why?
Who invented the music notation that we know today?
What's the best binding setup for ski touring?
Which is a species of fish? Black Mamba or Black Sea Bass
Where are do the Los Angeles Lakers play their home games?
Where is the Burg Lockenhaus located
How do I cook spaghetti?
Why kids who pursue athletics do well in professional life ?
Fix spelling, grammar and factual mistakes in the text below:

Finland prime minister, Sana Marrin, has lost her battle to stay in power after her centre-left Social Democratic party (SDP) was narrowly beat into third place in a cliffhanger election by its conservative and far-right rivals.

With 99.4% of votes counted on sunday, the right-wing National Coalition party was on course to secure 20.7% of the vote, with the populist, nation-first Finns party predicted to score 20.1%. Marin’s SDP was forecast to collect 19.9%.

Marin congratulated the election winners during her concesion speech, but hailed an improvement in both her party’s vote share and its projected number of MPs. “It’s a really good achievement, even though I didn’t finish first today,” she told supporters in Helsinki.

“Democrcy has spoken, the Finnish people have casted their vote and the celebration of democracy is always a wonderful thing,” she added. “We have good reason to be hapy about this result.”
What is prize money for Abel Prize ?
What is the most popular sport in the UK?
What is the best wideangle lens for sony apec camera
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Gastornis, Chimpanzee
What do they call Remembrance Day in the United States
How can the Federal Reserve control inflation?
On a gravel bike ride, categorize which of these items are 'useful', 'not useful', 'dangerous', or ,'neither': shovel, spare tire, clock, horn, water bottle, gps, knife, snake
Classify each of the following fruits and vegetables as either green or red color: cucumber, radish, watermelon, lettuce, tomato, avocado, strawberry, zucchini, broccoli, pomegranate.
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Hallucigenia, Fin Whale
India’s first Hydrogen Fuel Cell Bus is indigenously developed by
Based on the paragraph about the Korean War, what is the name of the new sovereign state created in the north?
Which city is the capital city of California?
Sort these car brands and models into car types, either sedan, SUV, or sports car: Volkswagon Atlas, Porsche Boxter, Ford Mustang, Porsche Cayenne, Toyota Camry, Toyota Corolla, Dodge Durango, Chevrolet Camaro, Ford Explorer, Nissan Sentra, Porsche 911, Ford Escape, Chevrolet Equinox, Honda Pilot, Kia Telluride, Genesis G90, Honda Accord, Honda Civic, Kia Forte
What is the history of the saxophone?
Rudy Stevens became famous under which name
Name some famous actors from the 1930's
Classify the following celebrities as Indian or Non-Indian: tom holland, gigi hadid, sara ali khan, vijay sethupathi, priyanka chopra, tom cruise, brad pitt.
Classify each of the following as a character from The Matrix or from Divergent: Four, Neo, Trinity, Caleb, Jeanine, Persephone, Tris, Cypher, Marlene
Explain the difference between rhotic and non-rhotic dialects of English.
How long is the Mars 2020 mission?
From the passage provided, extract when Gandhi moved to South Africa
What is ice hockey?
How many Kangaroos are in Australia?
Tell me whether these are movies about AI or other topics: , "Ex Machina", "Her", "Transcendence", "I, Robot", "Ghost in the Shell",  "The Godfather", "Pulp Fiction", "The Shawshank Redemption", "The Dark Knight", "12 Angry Men"
What are the words of House Mormont?
Given a reference text about Thomas William Dobbie, tell me his nationality.
What is the central limit theorem
What is the time value of money?
Tell me the mascots for the Generation 2 Pokemon games
What is machine learning, and when did it first emerge?
what is a fast break in basketball?
Write about the potential ethical concerns of de-identification techniques.
Given this paragraph about Taylor Swift re-recording her masters, who was responsible for the controversy?
I’m playing $1/$2 poker with friends. A friend had AK and I had AA on the button. I raised to $15 after a small raise before me and my friend with AK called. The other player folded. 

The flop came K, 8, 4 with no common suits. My friend checked and I bet 1/2 pot. He called. 

The next card was a 10 and I bet full pot (about $70) and he raised me all in to about $200. I called. 

The next card was meaningless and I won the pot. 

Did he play the hand well?
Think up a new seasoning blend that will be as popular as "everything but the bagel" seasoning.
What are different ways people help each other?
Given that preserving human brains for more than a century is fairly uncommon, what do you think was the motivation for preserving Guiteau's brain?
Does SCI Dallas hold men or women?
Given a reference text that describes LVMH, what brands are part of LVMH?
What are some Australian beer brands that have low or no alcohol?
How can sunshine lift your mood?
List the teams that have won IPL.
Give me a list of the last five european golden boots winner and tell me how many goals they scored and in which league they scored these goals.
If you are traveling outside the country, categorize each of the following as either: ‘Mandatory’, ‘Good to have’, ‘Least important’. Passport, Cash of the country visiting, Power bank, Book, Pen, Laptop
How do you make pizza?
What is the English Premier League?
What can help with puppy teething?
What countries make up the Benelux region?
Divide these numbers into prime, composite or neither. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Without directly quoting from the text, give me a summary of the second home controversy in Gwynedd, Wales.
How many cities in Lithuania are larger than Neris?
Who is the best character on Ted Lasso?
What is bond duration?
How did Pokemon start?
What are some ideas for fun rainy day activities to do with a 7 year old?
What are the words of House Mallister?
List a bunch of international marathons
What are secondary colors?
What is electrical conduction?
What is the game of cricket?
Based on the text, please give a bulleted list of Marc Andreessen’s accomplishments
5 steps to make a fire
What is Palmitic acid?
What is the popular TV show called where they send a number of people to a deserted island and they have to vote people off of the tribe?
Imagine you are the last person alive. You're an astronaut and alone and in space aboard the ISS. Write down your feelings and what happened to get there, with a detailed backstory.
During which decade did neural networks first lead to practically useful systems?
Give me 10 different ideas for how to spend a rainy Saturday afternoon
Why is the Chernobyl disaster considered to be the world's worst-ever civil nuclear incident when only an excess of 15 childhood thyroid cancer deaths were documented as of 2011?
Given the paragraph below, what is the population of Switzerland?
List all the years in order of appearance, separated by commas.
What are all the books in the Lord of the Rings trilogy?
What are the advantages of a propane grill?
I need to work out which of the following plants are edible and which are not: coleus, dandelions, yellow oleander, foxglove, roses, deadly nightshade, forsythia, begonia, angel's trumpets.
Which of the following cast members have names that start with the letters A, B or P?
Which U.S. wine company produces the most wine in the United States?
What is the Great Emu War and who won?
Why are border collies good guard dogs
What makes a song popular?
Why should I visit Netherlands?
Given this reference text about the Philadelphia Phillies, how many stadiums have they had and where do they play currently?
How do plants get their energy
Was Wilbur Snyder a good wrestler
Is endosymbiosis bad?
Where is Hoober Stand located?
Why do some babies need to stay in the NICU?
Do RVs have bathrooms?
Extract the names of the ramen. separate them with comma.
What is Autism and how varied is the spectrum?
I really like flying and am thinking about joining the U.S. military.  If I want to be a pilot, which part of the military should I join?
How does one state something as an opinion, belief, or preference rather than as if something is a fact?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Sarangi, Basset horn
Give me a list of the communes in Barolo DOCG
What is LDAP?
For whom is Daenerys Targaryen's dragon, Drogon, named for?
Please give me a short bulleted list of the key components/architectures in a convolutional neural network.
What are the main functions on a DSLR camera that affect the correct the exposure of an image?
What techniques are used to male dried fruit?
What color is an orange fruit?
Top 3 Hindi Movie
Should we all use Qubes OS for most daily task that involve the internet?
Why should you workout in the morning if you work remotely ?
In which Indian state is Banda Deul located in?
Name some books by Thomas Pynchon
What was the profession of Araber Rahaman?
Change this sentence to present tense
What does NSAID stand for?
Office of War Information?
Which of the big five is the most dangerous animals in Africa ?
Classify each of the following as creative or analytical: painting, math, physics, chemistry, drawing, filming
What was Mark Twain's real name?
What are the words of House Hightower?
Given this paragraph about Saffron, where does this name originally come from?
Shane Fenton became famous as who
What can you learn from living in a foreign country?
What are some famous Belgian singers?
What did Wei advocate for?
What country did NIKStewart live during middle school?
What is considered a good meal?
Which is a species of fish? Nurseryfish or Nursery
Given this paragraph about rain.  How is rain formed?
When talking about paint colours, which one of these colours is considered "cold", "warm" or "both". Both meaning the way the colour is perceived depends on the colours surrounding it.
Yellow, Yellow-Orange, Orange, Red-Orange, Red, Red-Violet, Violet, Blue-Violet, Blue, Blue-Green, Green, Yellow-Green
What city has Kogoshima as its airport
How do you navigate through a forest?
Given a reference text about Scrub Daddy, tell me the details on the deal the founder made on Shark Tank.
Write a polite rejection response to a LinkedIn recruiter
Given a reference text about Megan Reid, American professional soccer player, what college did she attend and how many soccer games did she start in her senior year of college?
From the given text, please tell me what were Bachendari Pal's accomplishments?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Given that the current year is 2023, how old is Chevron?
Tell me which of the following are dogs: Beagle, Labrador, Siamese, Chihuahua, Parakeet, Persian.
What is linear regression?
Give me a list of six different types of flowers I could buy someone
What field of science (biology, physics or chemistry) was Marie Curie a researcher in?
Given a reference text about Ainley's storm petrel, tell me when and where they breed.
Why are protein waffles so dry?
What role did Danbury, Connecticut play in the American Revolution?
Given this article about Operation Aurora, How was the operation named?
Which German word means lightning war used in WW2
From the given text, List some details about the song "Key West (Philosopher Pirate)"
Give me the steps to purchase a new pair of shoes.
If I'm strong in the gym will I be good at rock climbing?
Tell a child a story about a dinosaur who plays baseball but has to take a break due to an injury
Which of these Disney cartoons were remade as a live action movie? Lion King, Toy Story, Aladdin, Jungle Book, Fox and the Hound, Shrek
Tell me whether these are cheese or bread: Gouda, Focaccia, Brie, Baguette, Pecorino, Romano, Cheddar, Brioche, Ciabatta, Manchego, Smoked Gouda, Pita, Sourdough
Where does the word cliche come from?
Describe a situation in which scraping data from the web may be justified. Illustrate this situation with a specific example.
Please give me a bulleted list of the different types of horses cited in the text as well as their maximum height in centimeters (separated by a comma)
What are the best things about being in a loving relationship?
Why do people say "if I had a nickle for every time"?
Think of different ways to make friends
Are penguins native to Alaska?
Which is a species of fish? Rainbowfish or Rain
What is a credit score?
Who wrote Dr Zhivago
Is Spain a good place to live?
How many players are there on each side of a water polo game, including the goalie
When was the NFL founded? Which NFL team won the most Super Bowls? Which quarterback has won the most Super Bowls?
What is an RFI (request for information)?
Can you please describe the game of golf?
What can I do in Amsterdam on a rainy day?
What are the words of House Serrett?
Give me a bulleted list of ways to protect a house from hurricane damage
Who is FDR?
What is celiac disease?
What are the words of House Crakehall?
Tell me whether these are solid or gas at room temperature: oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide.
Why do we have car registrations
What is apartheid, and which country experienced it?
What is a skiff?
Given this paragraph, where did the German dish sauerkraut originate from?
What is the difference between baking soda and baking powder?
Out of these animals, categorize them as either 'small' or 'large: A horse, a mouse, an elephant, a snake, and a whale.
What is the most famous sport in the world
What are the supplies needed for block printing?
What was the SS Frosta
When teaching children about when to do things, which would you say are things people do in the morning, and which are not? Wake up, fall asleep, drink coffee,  put on pyjamas, turn off the lights, have breakfast.
Summarize the following text into a sentence of 20 words or less:

U.S. Justice Department and FBI investigators have amassed new evidence indicating possible obstruction by former President Donald Trump in the probe into classified documents found at his Florida estate, the Washington Post reported on Sunday, citing sources.

FBI agents seized thousands of government records, some marked as highly classified, from Trump's Mar-a-Lago estate in August. The investigation is one of two criminal inquiries into the former president being led by Special Counsel Jack Smith.

Trump, who was indicted on Thursday in a separate inquiry in New York, has denied any wrongdoing in the cases and describes them as politically motivated.

After his advisers received a subpoena in May demanding the return of the classified records, Trump looked through some of the boxes of government documents in his home out of an apparent desire to keep certain things in his possession, the Post reported, citing people familiar with the investigation.

Investigators also have evidence indicating Trump told others to mislead government officials in early 2022, before the subpoena, when the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration was working to recover documents from Trump's time as president, the Post reported.

The FBI referred questions to the Justice Department, which did not immediately respond to a request for comment. 

In a statement to the Post, Trump spokesman Steven Cheung said that the "witch-hunts against President Trump have no basis in facts or law," and accused Special Counsel Smith and the Justice Department of leaking information to manipulate public opinion.

Smith's investigations are among a growing number of legal worries for Trump, who in November launched a campaign seeking the 2024 Republican presidential nomination.
In addition to the New York probe, Trump faces a Georgia inquiry over whether he tried to overturn his 2020 election defeat in the state.
What are a list of items I should have on my grocery shopping list every week
Given this paragraph about the Tour De France, how long is the race
Choose the word which is different from the rest: kiwi, eagle, emu, ostrich
What are some of the pros of subleasing?
What is the Nazi foreign policy debate
What is the difference between stress and strain?
How many days was the women's individual competition?
What did Gertrude Townend do
What is basketball?
Write a short letter to a dear friend who just lost their Mother, only six months after losing their father.  Both of their parents were someone you and your family were also very close with.
What is the Antartic?
What is a 'Public' School in the UK?
Name different corporate messaging applications companies use.
Why do some countries outperform other countries in certain sports despite having a smaller population?
Who owns Ritz Crackers?
What is the sport called Cricket
Why are gaming conferences fun for everyone?
What is a sedentary way of living?
What is LSD
How tall is 970 Park Ave?
For what was Luigi Giura reknowned known.
Given a reference text about NATO, when did Finland become a member?
Given these paragraphs about Asperger syndrome, what disorder has it merged into?
Who is the lead singer of Limp Bizkit?
Classify as a technical book vs Non technical book
Where do black walnut trees grow?
If McDonald’s were to go out of business and disappear, would the world be a better or worse place?
classify the following as outfits vs appliances: dress, shoes, toaster, jackets, fridge, air fryer, instant pot, vest, gloves, pants, jeans
How do you clear a scuba mask underwater ?
List the best-known types of Intellectual property. List the results in comma separated format.
Give me five data themed cocktail drinks.
What are the main places of visit in Port Blair.
Please categorize these items as something a human can safely drink or something that a human should avoid drinking: engine oil, tea, coolant, beer, molten lava, sparkling water, pasteurized cow's milk, and laundry detergent.
What is a “knock knock joke”?
What makes someone beautiful?
Who are the people named in the passage?
List five words associated with sadness
What is Photosynthesis?
give me a list of ways to cool down
Given this paragraph about Grumpy Cat, tell me the cat's real name.
How many goals did Archie Thompson's team mates score?
Tell me whether these are examples of twentieth-century architecture and design: modernism, art deco, art nouveau, post-modernism, victorian
What kind of species is the Linopyrga primitractus
Given this paragraph about speed limits, what was first law regulating speed limits in UK, when was it enacted and what speed limits it set.
What are the solar system planets?
In Africa, were cattle domesticated before or after agriculture?
Classify the following celebrities as sports or acting personalities or both : Arnold Schwarzenegger, Brad Pitt, Kevin Durant, Shohei Ohtani, Harrison Ford, Dwayne Johnson, Jason Statham, Stephen Curry, Robin Williams, Scarlett Johansson, Tom Brady, Patrick Mahomes
What is the empire state building?
Which country is Laurens Willy Symons  from?
When did the Artificer class first appear in D&D
I'm considering buying a bicycle. How do I know which one I should buy?
What can a person do in Virtual Reality?
What is the most famous landmark in Cologne?
Given this paragraph about magnesium, how is magnesium obtained?
What is the least common birthday in the United States?
Tell me which of the following objects are shaped like spheres: beach ball, banana, pencil, marble, credit card.
Given the following paragraph on siliceous ooze, how are oozes defined?
Where is Mount Everest located ?
Tell me three key things to do to drive a car faster on a track
What are some adventurous activities we could do during a bachelors party?
Will being fully autonomous change the future of car design ?
How can I improve my sleep?
Classify these objects as edible or inedible: pizza, slipper, cake, banana, biscuit, shoe, pencil, chalk, soda, juice, television, computer, mirror, cereal, rice
Classify each of the following as either a dog breed or a cat breed: Himalayan, snowshoe, Norwegian Forest, American Eskimo, keeshond, Persian, Jack Russell terrier
What is a quantum computer?
What is a tardigrade?
List me some details regarding carreer of lawyer Harry L. Shorstein
How does the "fire power" help Fargus?
What are some facts about Aydın İlter?
Classify each of the following as either as a country or state: California, Texas, Oklahoma, New York, Illinois.
What is GitHub?
Classify the following as a 'Country', 'State' or 'City': California, Sacramento, Chicago, Singapore, New Delhi, London, Tennessee, New York
Name the past 5 FIFA World Cup Champions
Have any women won the Nobel Prize in Physics?
Give me an example of numbers in these categories:  Natural Numbers, Prime Number, Composite Number, Whole Numbers, Integers, Rational Numbers, Irrational Numbers, Real Numbers, Complex Number.
Extract from the text the events won by the Kawasaki KX 500 motorcycle, and separate them by a comma.
How do solar panels create energy?
Name five different cuts of beef that I could ask for from a butcher
Name the seven Alpine countries from West to East.
Given a reference text about the blackbuck, tell me how big the males are.
Which parts of India were largely affected by the cyclone Bulbul?
Where is texas?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Sakara, Cavaquinho
What Does the Referee Do?
Which of the following races do participants run in? A marathon, a triathlon, an aqua bike?
Why is the indictment of a former President such a divisive topic in the United States?
Tell me about Emily Procter
What are some of the best things about a summertime visit to Mount Desert Island, Maine?
What is Purchasing power parity (PPP)?
Queen Elizabeth II was married to whom?
Tell me about water fluoridation
Who are some students at Hogwarts in Hufflepuff house that were in the same year as Harry Potter?
Provide some of the examples of regional governments.
What are the key terms in probability
What are the most famous sights of Sicily?
Where is Silicon Valley geographically based?
Which country has the largest population?
Identify the bird from the list: Chough, Cough, Clough
Who invented punched cards used in early computing 1880s
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Lotus, Lincoln
Classify each of the following as either a television show or a movie: The Wire, The Sopranos, Game of Thrones, Mad Men, Harry Potter, Westworld, Iron Man.
What is the more popular name for the Londonderry Air
Write a short story about a toddler and her imaginary friend. She is with her family and excited but nervous about the new surroundings
Given a reference text about Rraboshtë, tell me what the village is known for and what country it's in.
Write a convincing letter to complain to a perfume manufacturer about a broken perfume bottle.
What is Methadone intermediate
What is Henri-Cartier Bresson known for?
What are the 13 departments and main communities of France's administrative region of Occitania?
Which of these are fruits and vegetables: apple, tomato, pear, peach, broccoli?
Why are many plants green?
Given this paragraph about the United States Marine Corps, tell me when it was created in which city?
Jing is a 46-year-old male. He is an insurance executive who is married with two children. Jing is active in his church and plays golf on the weekends. He went to see his cardiologist because he experienced recent fatigue with chest pain on exertion. He has never smoked but he consumes 1 to 2 alcoholic drinks per day. His medical history reveals a blood cholesterol level of 260 mg%, a triglyceride level of 198 mg% and an HDL-C value of 43 mg%.  Considering his sex, age, symptoms, and risk factors, can you reason about the likelihood of Jing having coronary heart disease?
What is the best string tension for a tennis racket?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Daxophone, Kobza
Why was peanut butter invented?
When is the best age for kids to approach sailing?
When was siri for the iphone created?
Extract when the Blue Angels formed
What are the different types of loan or mortgage products for home buyers in the U.S.?
Why do we love green
Which swimming stroke is the hardest?
How can I be more productive?
Who won the FIFA World Cup 2014?
What are the words of House Greyjoy?
Who are the little Japanese girls who find Totoro?
From the passage provided, list the awards won. Include when they were won and by whom.
Do pilots of civil aircraft know the exact weight of the aircraft prior to take-off?
Classify the movies into Romance and Drama genres.

Pyaar Diwana Hota Hai, Bas Itna Sa Khwaab Hai, Paagalpan, Uljhan, Yeh Zindagi Ka Safar
Who is the prime minister of Japan?
in which city was the first public opera house opened
Given this paragraph on Anton Chekhov, please tell me which playwrights he is most often grouped with?
What rule change was introduced by FIFA following the match between Australia and American Samoa in 2001?
where is India?
What is the difference between a lion and a tiger?
The first human case of Monkeypox was recorded in
Extract the awards that Ian McEwan has won and list them in chronological order (oldest to most recent) using bullets, with associated dates in parentheses.
Is cricket a popular sports in USA?
How do I make a perfect grilled cheese sandwich?
From the passage provided, extract where the first session of Indian National Congress was held
Which African country was formerly known as Abyssinia?
What are some top  things to do in Amsterdam?
Please create a chronological timeline of the Bosnia and Herzegovina intervention by NATO, based on the passage provided.
Please summarize the challenges faced by the factory workers in The Matchgirls musical.
What type of jacket do grizzlies usually wear?
When was the last time aliens visited the earth?
Pick the best starting five from all players in NBA history
If your child has been told that he or she has lice, what should you do?
What is Armin van Buuren known for?
What is a medallion architecture in data engineering?
Can you fish in the Kalamazoo river and lake in Allegan County?
Given this text about the nutrition profile of peanut butter, what vitamins is peanut butter rich in?
Who is Michael Jackson?
Give me a list of animals you might raise for milk
What are some of the major food allergens in the USA?
If someone is tall, what sport should they try?
Extract the cinema industry and the percentage box office share occupied by that industry in the format {Industry} - {Percentage} and show as a bullet list. If no percentage specified just list the industry name.
Classify each country as Nordic or Iberian: Spain, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Portugal
Name some of the highest-grossing film of all time from July 2019 until March 2021 based on the passage.
How many ways are there to skin a cat?
What are the big four accounting organizations as per the given passage? List the names in bulleted format.
Provide a bulleted summary of the different types of taxes in the USA.
What are five totally distinct, creative ways to describe the usefulness of a broken stapler.
Which of the following are characters from Harry Potter: Hermione Granger, Harry Potter, Ron Weasley, Dobby, Draco Malfoy, Severus Snape, Professor Dumbledore, Luna Lovegood, Indiana Jones, Darth Vader, Jack Sparrow, Terminator, Batman, Superman, Joker, Gollum.
Tell me whether these animals are a canine or a feline: French Bulldog, Siamese Cat, Sharpei
Share why you support the underdog or the favorite in sports, and why it's the right thing to do.
Suggest some ranged weapons for role playing games.
What are the primary elements of Odissi dance?
What is an Enzyme inhibitor
How many moons does Mars have?
5 ways on prem is better than cloud
What to do in Seattle in 48 hours?
Based on the following passage make a list of 6 conventional dried fruits.
Is Python or Java a better programming language?
What is the least common birthday?
How many homologous pairs do humans have and what is the exception?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Goldfish, Sika deer
According to this paragraph, what is UVA's overall ranking among national universities?
When was HMS Glowworm (H92), a G-class destroyer launched?
What is stream processing ?
Tell me whether these are names of paintings or song titles: The Starry Night, Mona Lisa, Irises, Billie Jean, Hey Jude, Come As You Are.
Which state is the city of Springfield from in the Simpsons?
Suggest some ways to protect the Earth from an asteroid or comet?
Where was Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu founded?
What geographic area do Sephardic Jews originate from?
What is the Capitol
What is the main cause of lightning?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: foot, metre
What is Asperger syndrome?
What is intelligence?
What plant do cats like to chew or sniff, which may give them a "high"?
Please explain the Primacy of the Spains
What is a lawn mower?
Where did Bermuda grass come from?
What is a verb?
What is a community structure in the study of complex networks?
Name 5 possible fuel sources for a futuristic spaceship
Who won the March Madness Mens Basketball Tournament in 2022?
What are some ways that I can reduce the latency of my API?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
Which ones of the following are considered nutrient-dense foods: soda, vegetables, fruits, chips, whole grains, seafood, cookies, eggs, beans, peas, lentils, unsalted nuts and seeds, fat-free and low-fat dairy products, fried chicken, lean meats and poultry.
How long is an Ironman triathlon?
How much did Shaffer donate?
Please provide me with ideas for dinner tonight.
how to give a great presentation
Where are good places for a family to visit in Portland Oregon?
Using valid, well-formatted JSON, generate a list of espresso spellings based on the text provided
What do I use a pressure washer for?
Choose the word which is different from the rest:  Mother, Friend, Sister, Father, Brother
What is the largest city in Oregon?
What is topography?
Why has the percentage of CEOs of Indian descent gone up in the last decade ?
What was the Tiryns culture
Given the reference text about the science fiction novel Neuromancer, tell me the novel's author and the name of the main protagonist.
What is tertiary analysis?
How many U.S. President were lawyers?
Which of these are movies that Adam Sandler starred in and which ones did David Spade star in? Tommy Boy, Black Sheep, 8 Heads in a Duffel Bag, Coneheads, The Emperor's New Groove, Joe Dirt, Click, Jack and Jill, Hustle, Uncut Gems, The Wedding Singer, Little Nicky
How do I get to Juneau, Alaska?
What is the current and future state of the economy of Africa?
What are the different types of stances in tennis?
Where did the bishop live after 1801?
Given the following passage about Theodore Roosevelt, please list the main accomplishments during his presidency.
How did Kdramas become so popular?
How many players are on a hockey team?
Name a famous American author who wrote stories about the American South during the early 20th century.
Give a list of domestic animals can be turned to pets
What was the public reaction to the draft during the Vietnam War?
How many letters there are in the Japanese language?
The following is an Abstract of a paper on Autism Spectrum Disorder. Based on this abstract  would it be a good idea to enroll a child with ASD into group sports? 
"Given the characteristics of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder, it is evident the difficulties they show in the development of social skills. The scarce participation of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder in group sports can be taken as a reference. The aim of this study was to analyse the impact of football on the development of social skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. In order to measure the sporting impact, it was necessary to implement a football training programme with the intention of evaluating different social skills. Thirteen children participated in the programme, all of them with a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder and with a severity level of 1. The study was based on a pre-experimental, pre-test/post-test design. Non-parametric tests were used for the statistical analysis, applying the Wilcoxon test. Two specific tools on social skills were used for data collection. The results showed a generalised improvement in the dimensions linked to the social skills assessed. This highlights the possibility of considering group sport as an alternative to be taken into account to work on and enhance social skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder"
Given these paragraphs about Asperger Multiomics, what is the goal in combining all the "omes"?
What are the best months to visit Alaska?
What are some good US and Canada summer vacation ideas if I like mountains, lakes, and trees?
Classify each of the following as either a faction from The Divergent Series or luchadore wrestlers: Erudite, Candor, Rey Mysterio, Abnegation, Blue Demon, Bengala, Mistico, Dauntless, Amity, Bam Bam
What is Solidarity Tax?
In this reference text summarizing plot of the book The High King, how did the sword Dyrnwyn lose its power?
What is a good approach to grocery shopping?
How do I open a pomegranate without exploding?
What do you love most about spring?
Which is a species of fish? Pike or Parrot
Given a reference text about Apple, what tactics did Steve Jobs use to help the company recover?
Who are the longest running cast members on Saturday Night Live?
Why do oceans have salt water but rivers have fresh water?
Are there any benefits of fasting?
List the countries north of the arctic circle ordered by the closest to the north pole
Give me exactly 5 characteristics of award winning songs.
What is the best food place in Bangalore?
What are your recommendations to achieve a healthy lifestyle?
What is recency bias?
India's Last 10 Presidents
What should you do if you see a brown bear approach you while you are hiking?
Why is NFL football called football when players use their hands mainly?
King Charles III is 73 years old and his full name is?
Tell me whether these mountains are included in the New Hampshire 4000 footers: Washington, Adams,  Moosilauke, South Carter, Garfield, Wildcat A, Wildcat B, Wildcat C.
Who was John Dawkins better known as
What are the most common types of pizzas?
When did the first World war start?
What are some of the causes for the decline of the northern rockhopper?
Replace the word "lawyer" with "judge" and the word "pacifist" with "peace lover"
How many percentages of people in London prefer to walk ?
Identify different ways to achieve safe atmospheric entry for space shuttles and provide a bullet list.
According to this paragraph about UVA, what happens to a student who commits an offense from the honor system?
What are the best books of Dostoyevsky?
Extract the two properties that are sufficient to show that a subset of Euclidean space is compact. Present these properties in a bullet list.
What are some basic spirits you should have at your bar
What is the movie A Silence Voice about?
Which female Canadian director has directed episodes of Better Call Saul, The X-Files, and Game of Thrones?
What is the benefit of CI/CD
What was the The Treaty of Tordesillas?
Is Star Wars Science Fiction or Fantasy?
What is an archipelago
What is goal line technology in a soccer game?
in which country could you spend a Kwanza
What are the best vegetable crops to plant in Washington state for home gardeners?
Based on the following passage, give 3 reasons why the Sixteenth Amendment was passed and ratified.
is security a great career
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Tasmanian Tiger, Macaw
What is the distance from the Earth to its moon?
What are the principles of Judo's philosophy called and what do they imply?
Should I take extra fuel when traveling to Alaska?
Provide an example of using modern materials science to study archaeological artifacts
Why do we need robots?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Carillon, Rebab
At what temperature does water boil?
Given a reference text about Valery Moiseevich Leibin, tell me where he is a member of an editorial board and when he died.
which weighs more, a pound of bricks or a pound of feathers?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Klong khaek, Sanshin
Name three landlocked countries in Africa
Who has been named as  Kid of the year by Time Magazine?
Why do people move/sway during music?
Tell me which one of the following sports are Olympic sports: karate, snooker, wrestling, tai boxing, football, basketball.
Is Dijkstras algorithm a greedy algorithm or dynamic programming algorithm
Please give me an example of this phenomenon that I can understand as a layman.
Which are the main reasons for doing a PhD?
Extract the dates from the following.
Without quoting directly from the text, provide me with a summary of the James Webb Space Telescope?
Give me a list of funny American sitcoms that had their first season in the 2000s
Why is cricket the most viewed sport in India?
Given the reference text about the American Rescue Plan Act, tell me how much money was authorized to be spent.
Why is Dunkin' Donuts so popular?
Given this paragraph about magnesium, what is the boiling point of magnesium in celsius?
What can be done to resolve issues with climate change
Write a letter to your friend expressing your feelings about earning your first wage.
Classify each item as "soft" or "hard": bowling ball, cinder block, tissue, memory foam, croissant, hammer
Please write an email to the parent who complained about your child hitting their child.
Linus Torwalds invented and wrote what
What is Denville Station?
What is the nature of god, from a logical perspective?
Classify the following beverages that are typically served as either carbonated or non-carbonated: milk, soda, orange juice, beer, lemonade, coffee, sports drinks
What does zan zendegi azadi mean?
Where do we find Asiatic lions in India?
Why do people think that cricket is a boring sport?
Plan a 10-15 day trip from bay area to Arizona, Las Vegas, San Diego, Los Angeles
Identify which car manufacturer is German or American: Audi, Buick
What is the best way to get a good night of rest.
Who created Tetris?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills
How object-oriented programming is different from functional programming?
Will AI destroy the world ?
What is the last step before a star collapses into a black hole?
Classify each of the Pokémon characters into different types.
Does Belgrandia varica live in the ocean?
Test from Mike
What is a persona?
Can you tell me three apex predators?
Extract the different storage configurations available to the iPhone 14 that are mentioned in the text. Put them in a comma separated list.
How do you keep you dog happy?
What kind of species is the Olivella rehderi
What are the prizes of the Festival of Festival in Saint Petersburg, Russia?
How many people were present in West Berlin when US President JFK delivered his infamous "Ich bin ein Berliner" speech?
Who is called Napoleon of Iran?
What year did the Star Wars Trilogy premier in theaters?
What does a lawyer do?
Which of these foods are kosher? Lobster, cheeseburger, hamburger and fries, shrimp and grits, thai red curry with tofu, thai red curry with chicken, birthday cake, lentil soup with ham hock.
Which one of these are unlike the others: Toyota Supra, Mitsubishi 3000GT, Mazda RX-7, Nissan 300ZX?
What type of model is the Citroen C4 Cactus?
Imagine you come across a time machine and that with this machine time travel is possible, however, you can only make one round trip to the past and back. What year would you travel to and why?
Tell me about the Battle of Rabb
Give me a summary of how to determine if a number is prime or not.
Which one of these do not belong to the group:  Feeling, Joy, Anxiety, Anger, Sorrow
What was the name of the last team Pele played professionally?
Which of these animals are domesticated: Dog, Cat, Serval, Monkey, Ferret, Goldfish, Lion, Bear, Sable
Categorize the below types of animals based on whether they are domestic or non-domestic
dog, cat, badgers, cougars
What was discovered in 1922 by Howard Carter
Explain Ionizing radiation as a twelve years old kid.
Who are some students at Hogwarts in Ravenclaw house that were in the same year as Harry Potter?
Which of these were summer olympic sports in 2020: tennis, cheerleading, chess, boxing, basketball, ski jumping
What should I do in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam for a day?
Write about a sport which is always interesting and can be enjoyed alone or with people.
From the passage provided, extract which companies are local to Seattle which led to its development. Separate them with a comma.
where do you stay ?
Write a 3 bullet summary about McDonalds from this passage?
What were the names of the people who wrote Massive Attack's Unfinished Sympathy? Extract the name and surname into a comma-separated list.
Give me the list of fictional dogs in prose and poetry
Who was Alexander Greek Thomson
Vanessa and Lauren are both 32-year-old women with different levels of exercise experience. Vanessa, who weighs 124 lbs, has lifted weights before but Lauren, who weighs 166 lbs, has never participated in resistance training. Both women participate in initial fitness assessments and want your advice about starting a muscular fitness program at your exercise facility. Choose a different test to measure each woman's upper body muscular strength. Briefly explain the procedures for each assessment. What common errors should you watch for?
Based on the given text give the name of the people and a summary of how they contributed to the notion of infinite or multiple worlds.
Can you summarize the Korematsu case?
Tell me whether a human has two or one of each of the following body parts: eye, mouth, nose, leg, ear, neck
Based on the passage list the four companies apart from Apple which are part of Big Five American information technology companies. Present the result in a comma separated manner.
Classify each of the following as either a deciduous or evergreen tree:  Oak, Pine, Spruce, Maple, Fir, Elm
The only known monotremes in the animal kingdom are the echidna and which other creature?
How are noble gases obtained?
What is the Monty Hall problem?
Classify the movies into Thriller and Action genres.

Aks, Pyaar Tune Kya Kiya, Vadh, Farz, Angaar: The Fire
Imagine you are the last person on Earth. Write a diary entry describing your thoughts and feelings.
What is the list of football clubs in England by competitive honours won?
Classify these tasks by how easy they would be for a 10 year old to do (either easy or hard): drive a car, tie their shoes, throw a baseball, go to college, ride a bike, spell the word "water"
What is kindergarten?
What are some of the languages spoken in Spain?
What is a 4x4?
What is the capital of Norway and when was it founded?
Give me a list of the dog breeds
Tell me whether these operation systems are open-source of proprietary; Ubuntu, iOS , Debian, Fedora, CentOS, macOS, Open Suse, Windows
How are clouds formed?
Which of the following are types of tea and which are types of coffee: chamomile, herbal, French roast, double latte, Earl grey, English breakfast, and a cappuccino.
Classify the animals based on their food habits into Herbivores or Carnivores.
Jackal, Hyena, Zebra, Giraffe
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Allosaurus, Amur Leopard
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kebero, Vlier
How to get an efficient cardio workout and improve your speed, and gain other health benefits?
When did Rolex introduce the Batman GMT
Segregate the below words as palindrome or not.
kayak, deified, rotator, repaper, deed, peep, wow, noon, taste, bait, not, built
Classify each of the countries as "English Speaking" or "Spanish Speaking": Costa Rica, USA, Canada, Ecuador, Peru
Extract the celebrity guests that appeared on the show Parks and Recreation.
Explain the best way to swing a golf iron compared to a golf driver.
Is UBS a good bank
How did Chiune Sugihara save lives?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of Brendon Smalls career
In accordance with existentialism, does life have universal meaning?
What do people paint?
Extract all the names of people in this paragraph on the twelves apostles of Jesus, in a bullet point list.
Who are some notable guests on Between Two Ferns?
Which country was the first to introduce old age pensions
which of these is a musical movie: Despicable Me 1, John Wick 4, Avengers or Singin' in the Rain?
Can formula feeding cause NEC in a pre-mature infant?
classify each of these as either computer software or hardware: RAM, SSD, keyboard, mouse, trackpad, python, R, Scala, Google, Gmail, Figma, camera, screen
Why are there so few works of Kafka left even though he was a prolific writer?
Summarize the lay out of the Jardins du Château Val Joanis
Which of these are soccer players? Maradona, Joe Biden, Michelle Platini, John Terry, John Oliver, Mike Anderson, Steven Gerrard, Mo Salah, Obama, Michael Jordan
What type of kitchen knife should I buy?
Identify the bird from the list: Hoot, Coot, Foot
How to take care of indoor plants?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Saber-Toothed Tiger, Mountain Plover
Would you like to try some Bánh Xèo, a popular Vietnamese disk?
How do I save for retirement?
Is tomato a fruit or a vegetable ?
Name all of the NBA Championship teams in history.
Who was Rosa Parks?
What is PySpark?
What are all the name the country Singapore had been referred as in this text?
Who are the best artists throughout history?
How do you make fresh pasta?
Which film owns the record for the most Oscar wins?
Name some NHL hockey players that were born in Arizona.
What are the best sports movies?
Give me a list of the top five most followed Instagram profiles, along with their number of followers.
Given this table of races and dates, how many races took place after July? Give the answer as a number.
Of the following list of indoor plants, classify them as either 'low light' or 'indirect bright light', "direct bright light". Snake plant, succulent, Monstera, ficus leaf tree, snake plant, aglaonema, jade plant, pothos, inchplant
How is pickleball different from tennis?
Steps to prepare an omelette
While deciding to buy a bicycle, you need to consider few parameters such as age, gender, price, quality, the purpose of buying, type of bicycle/features etc. For ex: if you are a boy of age 24, then you would consider to buy a bicycle with height of 18" inch, with gear & shocker, etc.
And if you are a girl of age 6 yrs, then you would consider a kid friendly bicycle with good safety features that the kid can ride.
Explain gravity
How tall can a human being theoretically be?
Write me a cover letter for an application for a role I'm applying for. The role is with a technology company that sells software that helps consumers find the perfect hat based on the size and shape of their head. My name is Roger, I am passionate about hats and have a background in niche technology sales. The hiring manager's name is Jamiroquai. The companies name is Hats4U
How is digital switching possible?
What kind of socks do grizzlies wear?
What is the difference between a piano and a harpsichord?
What is your favorite piece of classical music?
List some cool places to go visit when you go to Prescott, AZ
From the passage provided, extract the winter months in Andhra Pradesh. Separate them with a comma.
Why do we feel worse at night when we have a cold or the flu?
Why are dogs so good at smelling?
What is the largest American city by population?
Give me a summary about Michael Jackson
Give me a summary of how the citric acid cycle works
Which seventh season episode of Game of Thrones did Alan Taylor direct?
Please sort the following numbers in ascending order: 6, 88, 4, 2074, 34
Based on this article, what was the relationship between Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah and Alauddin Mujahid Shah?
Symptoms of Sick Liver
Where can I see the remnants of a meteor strike on earth?
What is gRPC?
What your favorite teaching of Stoicism?
What position did Andre Piters play in soccer, given the following paragraph?
Which of these are cities and which are countries: Paris, Argentina, Mountain View, Singapore, America, Cape Town
How many NBA basketball teams are in California?
Which is a species of fish? Goat or Goatfish
Who is the greatest soccer player of all time?
From the passage identify the type of video games which Gamezebo reviews. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What is an "El Niño" weather pattern?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of New Jersey
Tell me whether each food is high in fat or low in fat: butter, mango, banana, rice, peanuts, cheese
Find an item from each category bellow that somehow relates to a tangerine.

place:
animal
vehicle
feeling
food
tech
song
movie
What is the difference between benefits and compensation?
Who was favored to win the 2023 NCAA Men's Collegiate Basketball Championship game?
What is a PCR test?
What is the difference between MMA and boxing?
Does Niksar have a castle?
Who has scored the most runs in ODI cricket?
I'm planning a month-long trip and am wondering which of these items are okay to be kept in a carry-on bag. Could you help classify these items as "allowed" or "not allowed" by the TSA? Toothbrush, Cologne, Beard Shaver, Alcohol, and Bottle Opener.
Classify the below places based on whether they are mountains or river.
Everest, Niles, Hudson, Nanga Parbat
Classify these wild mushrooms as poisonous or edible: jack-o-lanterns, chanterelles, morels, death caps, destroying angels, lion's mane, false morels, maitake mushroom, oyster mushrooms
When did the global population reach 8 billion people?
What are some items that you might see in a fridge?
Give me a list of the best sad songs to play.
Write a poem about lost friendship
What is the measure of electric potential?
Using examples taken from the paragraph, provide the major risks to humans with climate change in a short bulleted list
What is the standard loft of a 9-iron in golf?
How much snow feel in the California Sierra mountains in 2023?
Extract the dollar values from this page:
What was the White Brigade
What are four well known movies with Samuel L Jackson?
Were cars used for transportation in the 19th century in King Field?
Who is Brad Pitt?
Where was Tabunia
What is a cashless option exercise?
Where is the Birthplace of 'Silicon Valley
If we dug straight through to where we stood on Earth, would we reach the other side?
What are the different types of shots in ice hockey
What should I do during a visit to Indianapolis?
Why are the Los Angeles Lakers the most famous and successful basketball franchise in the world?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Smilosuchus, Brown Bear
Extract the types of communication methods that domestic cats use.
Give me a list of privacy centric browsers for Android users
Who directed the first two episodes of season three of Game of Thrones?
Classify each of the objects are "round" or "rectangular": television, baseball, brick, tire, book, manhole, donut, bench
how to get out of maze
Identify which car manufacturer is Italian or American: Lancia, Lincoln
Which of these are international tennis players: Virat Kohli, Pete Sampras, Mike Tyson, Roger Federer
What is baseball?
If I have auditioned for and accepted a role in a local, community theater production, is it acceptable to drop the show later if something else comes along I like better?
What is the recipe for a successful hackathon?
What's the most impressive thing happened in the world since you were born?
Which are the U.S. cities and which are U.S. states in this list? Montana, Chicago, New York, Atlanta, Honolulu, Florida, Austin, South Dakota
What is a Semantic Layer?
what is Asia
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Esterilla, Geomungo
What is the fastest production car in the world?
From the following description of the Hatfield-McCoy feud, identify the person condidered the leader of the Hatfields.
Given this paragraph about Mohamed Fourati, at what age was he appointed as hospital assistant?
Can you give me a summary of the story of the Vidhivilasa movie?
Give me a list of best movie review websites.
Classify each tree as an evergreen or fruit tree: Blue Spruce, Jack Pine, Sweet Cherry, Coconut, Mountain Hemlock.
Have you ever seen the Milky Way?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Brac, Piri
What is RSU?
Of the following book characters, which are vampires: Lestat de Lioncourt, Bella Swan, Edward Cullen, Jacob Black, The Seeker
What quality is common among all of Ingersoll's positions held within the Navy?
What are some things you could do over the Easter break?
Extract the list of the countries where Coffea arabica has been grown, and separate them with a comma
What is CRISPR?
Please extract the stops of the South Western Mail in order in a list delimited by underscores and exclude return service.
Choose the word which is different from the rest: curd, butter, oil, cheese, cream
What is IMPS?
What are the options for you to use as an egg substitute when you are vegan?
What is the largest lake in Switzerland?
Tell me whether these cities are in Italy or Switzerland: Milan, Florence, Zurich, Bern, Lucerne, Rome
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Triangle, Pinaka vina
From the given text, list down some points about television series Sadie J
Extract the names from the cast of the film Replikator, and separate them with a comma.
What is at the center of our solar system?
What is the best way to relax?
What is Don’t Starve Together?
Tell me whether the following European languages are in the Indo-European language family or not: Spanish, English, Basque, Finnish, Romanian, Hungarian, and Catalan.
Give me three festive holiday meals I could serve to my family for Christmas
When was Campbell, CA founded?
What is CAPTCHA?
What were the origins of basketball?
Who was Tap Gordon Jones?
Which of these are Aamir Khan Movies : Sarfarosh, Mela, Dil, Darr, Beta
What are some of the major cities in Australia?
What items can be easily composted at home?
"William Bowery" is a pseudonym for whom?
Give me a list of the top 10 types of clouds
Given a reference text about Naul, tell me what country it's in and what river passes through it.
How did the United States win the Cold War?
Why Ramadan's date change every year?
Give me a list of the top MLB home run leaders of all time.
Given the following paragraph about the Sanford Stadium of the University of Georgia, where does the name of the stadium originate from?
What is fair market value
Which of these are electronic and which are found in nature: a laptop, a tree, Pixel phone, a calculator, an Apple Watch, a bee, and a volcano.
What are four universities in the state of Florida?
Queen Elizabeth II was crowned at Westminster Abbey on which date?
Which dog is the hero of the 1925 serum rum to Nome, Alaska?
Tell me whether the following animals are reptiles or amphibians: salamander, alligator, caiman, snake, toad.
What is renal compensation?
Is data security an illusion?
When was the Wold Bison Jump in active use?
What are the Great Lakes?
Who was the quarterback for the Denver Broncos when they won their first Super Bowl and what was his number?
How can I initiate conversation with a stranger?
Given this paragraph about Siedlce, tell me how many people live there and how far away from Warsaw it is.
How can I tell the neighbors kids to quiet down without being perceived as a grouchy old man?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Maram, Phin
Creative ways to call in sick at work
What kind of car was The Zuk
When was the big bang?
Classify each of the following as vertical or horizontal: balance beam, light pole, tree, barbell, floor, wall
why would someone run the Texas Independence Relay?
Given a reference text about the Pitt Street Mall, tell me how big it is and how many specialty stores it has.
What are different types of optical illusions?
What are the top 10 suggestions for fillings in Mexican street tacos?
Why do we have a threefold repetition rule in chess?
What does it mean if something "slaps"?
Why is it important to be a listener?
What are 3 things I should always have before leaving my house?
Tell me a fun fact about Boca Raton, Florida
Provide for me, a number of famous Japanese animation characters that I could research for an assignment on anime.
Turtle ship
In one sentence, what is this paragraph conveying?
How was the saxophone named?
Which of these animals can be pets? Wolf, dog, rabbit, squirrel, cat, lion.
Give me a list of most influential people in the world.
Think of a number of different ways you can cook eggs
Which Formula 1 teams has Fernando Alonso raced for?
Why is sitting the new smoking?
What is Ethereum?
Categorize the following as either a 'month' or a 'day'
Where is the best place to go to relax?
Tell me whether these are food or drink: juice, hamburger, coke, pizza, hotdog, steak, lemonade, apple cider.
What are different channels of communication to push information out to a sales organization?
What are some fun board games to play as a family?
Why practicing sport is important ?
What is the best way to reduce my carbon emissions?
Where is the home country of Joan of Arc?
Why should I read books?
how to find a good date?
How many states are part of New England?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Mosasaurus, Whale Shark
Why Men love whisky
What the five love languages?
Name famous French singers (all time).
Can you share a response of politely informing the customer that we dont support a feature
What two continents is Russia a part of?
Which is a species of fish? Wahoo or Yahoo
Explain different pizza styles
Name some of the major battles in the US Civil War.
What are some examples of popular sitcoms on television in the 1980s?
What are some common ways that adults break bones?
What year did the hindenburg disaster occur?
What is Nevada City known for?
Who created pilates?
What is ABAP?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Potomac
Please list down some details about Kate Elizabeth Pickett from given text
Classify each of these as ground transportation or aviation transportation: airplane, truck, bicycle, unicycle, jet, wagon, helicopter.
From the passage provided, extract the cost of the Ryman Auditorium's most recent renovation and expansion.
Who is the company Geberit
What is the difference between Parthian and Arsacid Empire?
What is lucid dream and how can someone learn to do it?
Tell me whether these are flowers or trees: Spruce, Calla Lily, Carnation, pine, beech, Orchid, oak, Tulip, Gerbera Daisy.
Given the following text, what is special about Prime Numbers?
What is Microsoft Teams?
How do I get good at magic tricks?
What is an anemone?
how to solve a Rubik's cube
What are the machine learning model lifecycle phases?
Classify each of the following plates as either food or a cocktail: sushi, mojito, quiche, tacos, moscow mule, old fashioned, pizza, pasta, sandwich, pho, margarita, martini, ramen
Why do I have a belly button?
Which NBA player has the most championships in NBA history?
How did YouTube exit?
What is MapReduce?
What are some ideas to keep the mind active as I get older?
Give me a list of the seven best beach honeymoon locations for 2024.
How do we get rainbows?
With reference to the text given, list some details about lung cancer
Where do Macarons originate from?
What is a Xbox Music Mixer?
Who set the first Guinness World Record for swimming under ice?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Bell, Tro
Classify each of the following as either a sports car or family car: porsche cayman, subaru brz, toyota camry?
What are 3 popular movies with Adam Sandler?
How should I go about planning an agenda for the upcoming leadership meeting I am hosting?
What countries are regarded as Nordic?
What *isn't* the meaning of life?
Extract the names of the freedom fighters of Bengal, India from the text. Separate them with a comma.
Give me a bunch of excuses about why I don't have my homework to turn in
Give me a list of the best food to try in Singapore
What is best Home kit
Think of 5 different ways I can cook a chicken breast without a traditional oven or stove.
Who was the first lead guitarist of Metallica?
Do I need Hadoop to run Spark?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Quicksilver, Flash
Summarize the mechanism for conventional superconductors.
Given this paragraph about battles under Alexander the Great what battle occurred prior to the battle of Issus
My computer won't start. How do I fix it?
What is the most effective way to clean your floors?
What are the main ingredients of guacamole?
Write an email to the head of academic coaching at  Services for Students with Disabilities sharing that I’ve applied to the coaching position. I have experience volunteering w children on the autism spectrum.
Who is the best basketball team in the NBA?
Which is a species of fish? Ayu or Aye
Tell me whether this is a mammal or a bird: parrot, dolphin, dog, guinea pig, parakeet.
When was the "No, They Can't" book released?
What is Houston, Texas, known for?
What are the best movies I've ever seen?
From the passage provided, extract the official language of Andhra Pradesh
Tell me a few highlights about Madonna's impact on pop music.
classify the following as mammals vs reptiles:
goat
snake
cockroach
pig
dog
caterpillar
lion
What are some of the most accessible jazz albums for someone new to jazz?
Who wrote the poker mindset
given the plot of 1985 hit Back to the future, how could Marty McFly have avoided having to reconcile his mother and father in order to save his life?
List all the singles Jimmy Cozier has.
What is the greenhouse effect?
What is hedge fund?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Semantron, Saw sam sai
Let's think of a two different methods to learn how to skateboard
Give me examples of German auto manufacturers still operating.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Whistle, Qiftelia
When was the US flag created?
Paul McCartney credits which artist with teaching him everything he knows?
How do cryptic crosswords work?
What is the legal difference between laches and waiver?
Name some television shows that were popular on Nickelodeon in the 1990s.
What does quantitative easing mean?
Where is the city of Nasimerice
Why do people enjoy wearing Patagonia jackets?
Who is Gordon Lightfoot?
What's the difference between facts and truth?
Tell me whether these are birds or bugs: termites, ants, cockroaches.
Classify each of the following as a eukaryote or prokaryote: E. Coli, worm, grouper, algae, salmonella, porcupine
Who is Carlos Andres Perez?
What's a good time of year to visit Seattle?
What is summer break?
Provide a list of your 5 dream cars
How far is Hornowek from Izabelin?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Agiarut, Piccolo
What is freedom?
What are the top 3 TV shows you have binge watched and why?
List the colors of the rainbow
Name the planets in the solar system, in the order of distance from the sun
Which episode of season two of Game of Thrones did Alik Sakharov direct?
I'm thinking about joining the military to help pay for college.  What are my options, and what do you recommend?
Which weighs more: a shipping container, a couch or a espresso machine?
What is a proper noun?
What is the difference between a hazard and out of bounds on a golf course?
From the passage identify the symbols of Persephone. Display the results in a comma separated format.
Classify the following habits as healthy or unhealthy. 
1) Smoke
2) Exercise
3) Take Breaks
4) Drink Alcohol
Come up with a marriage proposal in a holiday at Sicily.
Can you please divide these fruit and vegetables into red and green colors. Some can be either red or green, so list those as 'both red and green varieties'. Here is the list: cherries, raspberries, lettuce, celery cherries, strawberries, apples, peppers, cabbage, beans, kale, tomatoes, capsicum, raspberries, celery, spinach.
Given the paragraph above paragraph, what is the PMP and who established the exam.
What is Brownism?
Why do humans like cats?
What are all the possible answers from the magic 8 ball?
Can I unilaterally change terms of a contract?
What are the five best Kim Stanley Robinson novels?
Is my children's school information available to anyone on the Internet?
Given this paragraph about video game consoles, what was the first console?
How can one loose weight
Give me a list of some of the core beliefs in Stoicism
what do you think makes Japan Unique
Why is the 1980 gold medal match in hockey called the 'Miracle on Ice'?
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Diplica, Kontra
In Abrahamic religions, how many major commandants did Moses receive at Mt Sinai?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ferrinho, Bandurria
Why are there so many different types of cheeses in France?
Which is an imperial or a metric measurement: ton, tonne
Which are the earliest ancestors of Native Americans?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Tyrell?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Theropod, Pronghorn
Why was America called the New World?
What city is the capital of Alberta Canada?
What sport does Arshdeep play?
What makes a good password?
Identify which car manufacturer is British or American: Buick, Bentley
Write a short story about a woman named Mary who is a barista making a latte.
What is the largest lake in the united states?
I'm getting into music history and want to listen to authentic analogue music from the 1980's. Which of the following should I try:  ipod, vinyl, apple music, cassette, compact disc, spotify, youtube
Tell me if this a universal blood group:  A+, A-,  B+, B-,  O+, O-,  AB+, AB-
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Tremolo bass, Rackett
What is Rhaeboceras
What does it mean for something to be compostable?
What is the most important thing about being a parent of a three year old?
Classify each of the following as either a place or a thing: Rhode Island, cup, New Jersey, New York, watch, tv.
Tell me a few flaws of the Human Development Index from this passage
How can you get to Dry Tortugas National Park?
Give me a bulleted list of the cutest animals.
What coloring of cat is usually almost always female?
How do learn how to ride a bicycle?
When did India gain independence?
Are the racial depictions of Eugène Delacroix artworks facts?
What causes rain?
What black sweet is particularly popular in the Netherlands
Is a manned mission to Mars worth the cost ?
Who wrote the score for the film "Rise of the Planet of the Apes"?
What is measured on the Gay-Lussac scale
What are the core ingredients of a bechamel sauce?
Why are there speed limits on public roads?
What country is to the north of the United States?
Identify which car manufacturer is Japanese or American: Mazda, Chevrolet
Who are the avengers?
Based on the passage provided, what is the difference between Amdahl's law and the law of diminishing returns?
Is there a relation between wavelength and frequency?
Provide me with a some ideas on healthy activities I can do in nature.
Given this paragraph about Jordan, tell me where it is located and which countries it borders?
From this paragraph, what are indicators that Singapore's healthcare system performs well?
Give me six examples of common productivity myths.
How does FTX collapse?
In the following initial summary of the plot of the series My Hero Academia, what is the secret that Izuku must keep and from whom?
Make a bullet list of three different types of meat I could get in a taco
What is the best TV series for Kids?
What are some fun things to do around Seattle on a warm Summer day?
What's a good way to make a baked potato?
What are the benefits of building a large language model specific to your organization rather than using a third party vendor's model?
Can you tell me about different types of hot water kettles?
Help me pick a Lego set for my friends.
What tools Aloy can exploit to survive in the world? give me the category and examples in the format {category} - {examples}
What is the capital of the united kingdom?
Extract the names of the climbers who pioneered The Nose route on El Captain.  List them in order by date first and then alphabetically by last name.  Format them {Year} - {Name}.  Separate the pairs with a semicolon.
Which is a species of fish? Pintano or Pint
Can you give me the biography of Lia Cirio
Classify the following as either Australian flora or fauna: kangaroo, wattle, emu, possum, echidna, kookaburra, macadamia, eucalyptus.
Extract what countries border Greece based on the below text and separate them with a comma
Tell me what I need to know about the Dunning Kruger effect.
Which national parks should I visit in Utah?
What is glass made of
What is The Silmarillion?
Whos the lowest drafted NBA player to win the MVP (most valuable player) award?
What are examples of plants that can successfully grow in the tundra?
Tell me whether the following athletes are tennis or football players: Ibrahimovic, Medvedev, Agassi, Neymar, Halep, Davenport
What is a cat?
Why does a boat float on water whereas some other objects sink?
Please give me a bulleted list of sports teams in Spokane.
What are some approaches to prevent abuse of LLMs?
What types of political organizations did pre-colonial Africa have?
Using the text below extract the sponsor, bid amount and the time period (from year to to year) in the format: {sponsor} - {bid amount} - {time period) and show it as a bullet list
When was the Sydney Opera House formally opened
Distinguish between manmade and natural structures from the following:
Statue of Liberty
Suez canal
Niagara Falls
Vatical City
Valley of Death
Himalayas
Angorwat Temple
Taj Mahal
River Rhine
The strait of Malacca
Brooklyn bridge
what was the british empire
Where do we go when we die?
What does the distribution of isobars indicate?
How can you open a can without using your hands?
Does Minnesota have a professional hockey team?
Given a reference text about Qamus, when was it attacked and defeated?
Tell me which of these characters are in Disney or Dreamworks movies: Shrek, Simba, Lightning McQueen, Po.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: North Drums, Gunbri
What is the name of the curvy street in San Francisco?
Give me a list of data structures with O(1) access time
What Breaking Bad actor guest starred on Season 6, Episode 2 "Drive" of The X-Files?
Given a reference text about the Anglo-Spanish War, tell me what treaty marked the end of the war.
Who are the Dawoodi Bohras?
For following Apps in Apple Store, help me classify them into different categories, categories include Business, Developer Tools, Education, Games, Music. 
Here is the App list: Slack, Microsoft Excel, WPS Office, Apple Developer, Xcode, CodeRunner 4, Termius -SSH&SFTP client, Kahoot, Duolingo, Complete Anatomy 23, SimCity, Civilization VI, NBA 2k23, Angry Birds, GarageBand, Spotify, QQ Music
Classify each of the following as food, company or both: apple, unilever, avon, mercedez, nestle, meat, rice, penny, pineapple, beans, dm, banana
What are the names of the first three songs from Edmond Leung's The Story of June?
Which is a species of fish? Tetra or Quart
What is the best drum kit?
Are these companies private or public
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Khol, Mondol
What is the least common birthday in the US other than Feb 29?
What is core banking?
Given this reference text about Husinec, what was the highest temperature reached in Fahrenheit?
Tell me if the following countries are in Europe or in Africa: Portugal, Italy, Burkina Faso, Rwanda, Germany, Sweden, Spain
What is the chief economic activity of Weselberg?
Give me a bulleted list of the last 10 UK Prime Ministers
When did the new building open?
Tell me whether these sports use a ball or not: golf, gymnastics, boxing, soccer, football, wrestling
Which is a species of fish? Hoki or Loki
Who was found guilty for the murder of Nualchawee Petchrung?
What are the benefits of a carbon-fiber paddle for whitewater kayaking?
is customer support a great career
How can the dialogue be described in this film?
Suggest a vacation trip for a couple based in California who love spending time outdoors
What are the current f1 teams?
Given this paragraph about the tour de france, has the race ever not ran
Based on this text, what average temperature in degree celsius can I expect in April in Germany?
What is Gingham fabric?
Extract all the years mentioned in this text, separated by a comma
Where did peanut butter and jelly sandwiches originate?
You, a commercial gym supervisor, are supervising the resistance training area when you hear a lot of clanging noise by the seated leg press machine. You observe a participant not controlling the descent of the weights. You suggest he slowly return the weights rather than letting them drop quickly. A day or two later, he reports that he felt more sore than usual after that workout. What accounts for this? Is it safe for him to exercise today?
Name some popular American wine brands.
What are the best tips for professional Safari  photography  ?
Tell me about the Mughal Empire?
What should you do in a zombie apocalypse?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Meiolania, Tiger
Classify each of the following as moving horizontally or vertically: Elevator, sky diver, guillotine, car, rocket launch, boat
From the passage provided, extract the number of episodes that made up the seventh series of Waterloo Road.
How many inhabitants of Lone Pine survived as a result of the earthquake? Tell me how you came to that conclusion.
What is the job of Army Rangers?
When was the Indian National Flag adopted
Given this mechanism that the Tesla Model Y car uses to heat the interior cabin, what are some pros and cons of this design?
Extract from the text the method encouraged to use in Apache Spark.
Is the following statement true or false: the earth is the third planet from the sun?
Why is pricing important in the overall strategy of a product?
What is the difference between a guitar and a ukulele?
What is Dividend?
Why was the Laos team disqualified?
What is a brief summary of the book, "The Well-Educated Mind, A Guide to the Classical Education You Never Had", written by Susan Wise Bauer?
Why is it important to be passionate about one's choice of career?
Extract all the names of people from this article about Robert Ball.
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Wasp, Bumblebee
Which 3 mens tennis players have the most grand slam singles championships?
What is the capital of Brazil?
What is a sitcom?
Based on the reference text, provide a bulleted list summarizing Newton's three laws of motion
Classify each of the following as either a home audio device, a piece of furniture, or neither. 

Record player, subwoofer, coffee table, computer monitor, foam roller, speaker.
What is House of the Dragon?
From the passage name the parents of Hades. Display the results in a comma separated format.
From the passage provided,  extract the cost of building Taj Mahal
What are some good slogan ideas for my new boat rental company?
Give me some places to visit with a 8 year old kid
Why have modern newspapers declined in the 21st century?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Monkey stick, Tzouras
Based on this paragraph, extract the names of the books about Phish and list them using bullets.
Choose the word which is different from the rest: potassium, silicon, zirconium, gallium, germanium
In World Wrestling Championship 2022 Free Style Wrestling India won 2 bronze medals out of total how many medals
What attractions should I visit whilst in London?
Why some people are more stressed than others and how to manage stress?
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Frey?
What is the Cassandra database?
what is fish oil?
From the passage list all the years and the sporting events mentioned
here is a blurb about Meaghan Benfeito, Between which years was Benfeito actively competing in the Olympics?
What is the difference between a snap shot and a slap shot in hockey?
Who found and named Devil's Garden?
What were Georgije Hranislav hobbies?
What are the words of House Waxley?
What are the biggest marathons?
Which is better, a stock option or Restricted Stock Unit (RSU)?
What is a web browser?
What are the top 7 national parks in the United States?
Is Sicher a software company
How many hours does it take to drive 12 miles on this road?
How is Tesla organized as a company?
What are best novels in Spanish?
how is yogurt made?
Based on this text, where was Susan Eaton a professor?
Provide a number of different ways that someone can decorate a party.
What are some classes you need to take in university to become an aerospace engineer?
How can I schedule and run an effective meeting?
Given this paragraph about the Allegory of Peace, what does it represent?
Extract the gold medals championships and the year won by Ebikewenimo Welson from the text. List them using bullets in the format {Champioship} - {Year} in a comma separated list.
What is the meaning of life?
Why are In-N-Out cheeseburgers so good?
Can you tell me about the Porsche 993 targa?
Why Bengali language is famous
What foods are commonly eaten with ketchup?
Given a reference text about Mussa Azzan Zungu, tell me his current position.
What should be your day to day creator device ?
Classify the movies based on their genre.
The Pink Panther, Die Hard, No time to Die, Annabelle
List the British prime ministers since world war 2
Tell me which of these Australian cities are on the coast and which are inland. Brisbane, Melbourne, Canberra, Adelaide, Hobart, Darwin and Perth.
What to do if you drop your iPhone into toilet?
Extract from this passage the the locations where the Patriots have held training camp and separate the answers with commas.
Is your brain active during sleep?
Tell me about the most amazing trip an American could take.
What is connectomics?
Given this paragraph about a specific breed of scorpion, where can the coastal burrowing scorpion be found?
What are the top 10 US ski vacation destinations?
Why is UBS and Credit Suisse merging
Write a paragraph about the word "woman".
Name some of the characters from DC Comics.
Identify which instrument is string or woodwind: Folk harp, Rothphone
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Leedsichthys, Monarch Butterfly
What are some common software pricing models?
Who is the greatest Russian writer?
Who won Euro song contest Save All Your Kisses For Me
Queen Elizabeth II was born on April 21, 1926 in
Classify the following foods as Mexican or Italian: Burrito, Pizza, Pasta, Quesadilla, Taco, Gelato
Which countries became members of NATO between the years of 1999 and 2009?
What is Rio de Janeiro famous for?
What are the available treatments for Sensory processing disorder?
Name 5 movies directed by Quentin Tarantino
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Geophone, Penorcon
Give me a list of different ways to reduce the fat and keep you in good shape.
Do dogs have a third eye?
Is toastmasters a good organization to join?
Would you rather be stuck on a broken ski lift or a broken elevator?
Identify which animal species is alive or extinct: Plesiosaur, Loggerhead Turtle
What are the health benefits of walking for exercise?
What's it like to live in the belly of a whale?
Which Game Studio created Arcane?
Which one of these is a music band, and which one is a Football team : Manchester United, Linkin Park ?
What are the 7 Wonders of the Solar System:
Who was the costliest player in Indian Premier League (IPL) auction of 2020?
If you are traveling to the moon, can you think of any reason to bring a gun  ?
What is SCSS?
What kind of immigration system is the best
Who has won the most grand slams in men's singles tennis in open era?
What is the best season to visit Japan?
Write the first paragraph of a blog post describing the appeal of Cape Cod as a vacation destination.
Recommend me a SCI FI fiction book
What does a reverse osmosis filter do?
How many acres did Hiram farm?
Find the four eye shapes on Maitum anthropomorphic pottery and separate them with a comma
What was the primary reason for the mutiny that occurred in 1857, in British India?
Why is my car making a funny noise?
Does Julie Andrews have an EGOT?
My refrigerator broke for six days while I was on vacation. Which of the following foods would be still safe to eat unrefrigerated for that long: raw chicken, a jar of olives, hard cheese, milk, and fruit jelly.
Please explain the collectability impact on revenue recognition under ASC 606 guidance
Why is backcountry skiing fun?
From the paragraph provide, extract the year of launch and the vendor of the first open source CRM system in the format {Year} - {Vendor}
When was the HMS St David launched
What is a probability distribution?
How should I think about ways to arrange a desk in a home office
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Citroen, Chrysler
Extract the two main component of C++ in a bulleted list based on this passage.
What happened to Bosch's mom?
what can we do when coffee spill on laptop to make it working
What commercial airports are near Philmont Training Center (PTC)?
Which two kings did Sir Oliver Ingham serve under?
What are the different ways to score in American football?
What are five different things you could use a ruler to do?
Classify each of these are a television show or a movie: Die Hard, The Wire, Greatest American Hero, Better Call Saul, Raiders of the Lost Ark, E.T., and Family Ties.
What foods are high in antioxidants?
Who was Svea Kristina Frisch
What are Jindo dogs like?
who was Octávio Tarquínio de Sousa
Which episode of The X-Files did Dana Scully get diagnosed with cancer?
What was the first Porsche 911 with AWD?
What is repetition?
Write down some key points for the poem Garshasp-nama based on the given text.
What is Kalis Illustrisimo?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Kirikoketa, Ichigenkin
Which companies continue to make computers today: Lenovo, Apple, Tandy, Compaq, Digital, HP, Dell, Gateway.
Which bird has the longest wingspan?
What is the best way to wake up fresh in the morning?
The International Booker Prize 2021 was given to whom?
What are good finishes for a desk top made of hard wood?
How many series did Dance Mums air?
In which years did the Women's New Zealand cricket team win the world cup
How many types of elk are found in North America?
what are the different activities you can engage 5 year old kid during spring break
Tell me about the life of Adolphe Cohn
What types of ritual use Ayahuasca?
Which characters belong to DC or Marvel Universe? Fantastic Four, Doom Patrol
How do you cook spare ribs on a pellet smoker?
Is it possible to raise your child trilingual?
What are some titles from George Orwell?
Given this paragraph about Twitch Interactive, in what year did Amazon acquire them?
What is proteomics?
How can I make work meetings more efficient?
Classify each of the following as characters from books J.K. Rowling has written or books that Suzanne Collins has written: Peeta Mellark, Katness Everdeen, Effie Trinket, Seneca Crane, Lucy Gray, Cinna, Harry Potter, Severus Snape, Hermione Granger, Albus Dumbledore
Given this paragraph about a hotel, how many stories is the Ansonia?
How do you make a Martini?
Given this reference text about Isa Melikov, which events did Isa participate in 2008?
Can you tell me what the buddhist uprising is about in a few sentences?
Which of these are Pixar movies? Finding Nemo, Shrek, Avatar, Toy Story, Fast and Furious, Up, Inside Out, Turning Red, Everything Everywhere All at Once, John Wick 4, Ice Age, Madagascar, Incredibles 2
Given these paragraphs about Asperger syndrome, what are typical interventions that help improve the person's ability to function in the everyday world?
What are some languages spoken in Mexico?
What is Hasora discolor located?
Extract the unique names of composers from the text.  Separate them with a comma and a space.
Who is Kamala Harris?
Q: If I vape tobacco or nicotine am I at risk for complications from COVID-19?
Does my Myers-Briggs personality type determine my long-term career potential?
Is Belgrandia varica a type of plant?
Given this paragraph about Choro music style, what are the instruments usually used to play Choro ?
What are the 8 categories of scientific classification?
What color is a banana when overripe?
What do giant Pandas eats?
What are some of the best ways to generate passive income?
Did Damien Chazelle direct movies or TV shows first?
Given a reference text about Daal dhokli, tell me three commonly used daals.
List in a comma-separated list the members of the band Muse.
What Is The Tesla Model Y’s Charger Type?
Identify which car manufacturer is French or American: Venturi, Lincoln
Classify the musical genres of the following bands: Metallica, AC/DC, Aerosmith, Madonna
In what year did Singapore become an independent sovereign country?
Thinking about public opinion, what is the significance of “issue consistency” and “levels of conceptualization”?
UNESCO Peace Prize 2022 was given to
Outside of the Kelly and Birkin bags, what are some of the other bags that Hermès produces?
When should I use Slack versus email versus a phone call?
Which of the following are weather events: rain, snow, sleet, sunshine, hail, tornadoes, hurricanes, trees, lightening, rocks?
Based on the text, what are the best ways for people to eat fruits?
What band sang "Clint Eastwood"?
What is Violet Constance Jessop's nickname?
Best place to visit in West bengal
What is the main language spoken in Latin America?
What is the process called by which matter is converted from a solid directly into gas?
What makes trees and plants green?
The year 2022 was declared by UNGA as
Are alpacas and llamas the same thing?
What is the main language spoken in South America?
What are the names of the lines on Hong Kong's MTR network?
Will human beings be replaced by robots?
What are some weird ways I can cut my grass?
Extract interconnection technologies used to create a regular working system.
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Ranat thum, Tumbi
What are some quick ways to lose all of my money?
Tell me whether these are tree nuts: coconut, walnut, nutmeg, peanut, sesame, cashew, macadamia, almond.
Give me a list of great computer games
What are the key elements of a sauna?
Select the odd word from this list and explain why you chose it.
Larch
Elm
Oak
Yew
Rhododendron
What are the words of House Bulwer?
Can I feed table food to dogs?
Is it true that apples are vegetables?
Think up some ways to pass the time on a long airplane flight.
Who are the top 5 basketball players of all time?
Name some of the bravolebrities from The Real Housewives of Miami
What is the Premier League?
What causes that feeling of weightlessness when you're on a rollercoaster?
Please restate this information using simple or non-scientific language wherever possible
Give me the top 5 things I should do to prepare for a holiday abroad
Given the information provided about hottest chili pepper, which is the hottest naturally grown chili pepper in the world?
How can I become a better runner?
Why don't soccer players kick with their toe?
Classify the following foods as Indian or Japanese: Sushi, Sashimi, Ramen, Naan, Chicken Tikka Masala, Samosa
Which is a species of fish? Trumpeter or Trump
Classify the below into cars or SUVs.

Mazda CX50, Nissan Altima, Mazda CX5, Toyota Rav4, KIA Sportage, Honda Civic, Hyundai Elantra.
What started WW2?
As per the passage, list the subjects of which Narendranath was an avid reader.
Jing is a 46-year-old male. He is an insurance executive who is married with two children. Jing is active in his church and plays golf on the weekends. He went to see his cardiologist because he experienced recent fatigue with chest pain on exertion. He has never smoked but he consumes 1 to 2 alcoholic drinks per day. His medical history reveals a blood cholesterol level of 260 mg%, a triglyceride level of 198 mg% and an HDL-C value of 43 mg%.    After studying a 12-lead ECG tracing of Jing's heart, it is clear that his heart is ischemic. Suggest some follow-up screening tests and recommended interventions.
How many times have the Vancouver Canucks won the Stanley cup?
Which electric vehicle company does Elon Musk own?
What are some ways I could commute in to my office in downtown?
Who is Thor?
Identify which animal is domesticated or wild: Mink, American alligator
Give me a one line summary about smelting
What is the difference between dairy and cattle?
Classify the movies based on the protagonist hero who acted in them.
Chak De! India , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai, Om Shanti Om, Dangal, Sultan, Dabangg
What is an "outie" in the context of this paragraph?
Who was Jacques Malouin
What makes you smile? What makes you happy?
Name some public companies that have been valued at over 1 trillion dollars.
What are some ways you can cross the grand canyon?
Why is strength training important for distance runners?
Since it began, how many years has FIVB not been held?
In which year did the Portuguese first arrived in Brazil?
Without quoting directly from the text give me a summary of Cesar Chavez greatest achievements.
Who services the Saint-Germain-les-Belles station?
What is a remote control used for?
Tell me if these cities are in the United States or England: New York, Manchester, Bath, San Francisco, Oxford
What is the fastest point of sail?
What was the cause of MH370 flight's disappearance?
From the passage provided, extract the more recent available annual revenue from agriculture in dollars.
From the passage identify the domains in which Athena is considered God. Display the results in a comma separated format.
What is the 149th Boat Race?
What is the experience of Microsoft Office users moving to Google Docs?
What is structural genomics?
Make a list of some popular Japanese animations, I haven't watched yet.
Why is March Madness so popular in the United States?
Based on this paragraph about San Diego, what is the largest city in the state of california?
Given this reference text about Gorbachev, tell me whether he was an ally of Yeltsin and Putin.
Which of these famous football players have never won the Balon D'Or: Messi, Xavi, Zidane, Ronaldinho, Iniesta, Neymar
From the passage provided, extract the names of the writers for the movie Captain America: The First Avenger. Separate them with a comma.
Give me a list of 3 hobbies that are good for your health and inexpensive
Which of these words are nouns and which are adjectives. Fridge, wipe, bed, chair, jump, yell, sleep, fruit and talk.
What is Bart Simpson's graffiti tag?
What is the difference between walking and running?
What is the happiness index report and which country tops the happiness index in the world
Abel Prize  is given in which field ?
How many people who contract COVID-19 end up experiencing symptoms and what symptoms might they experience?
What is surfing?
Tell me the genre of each of the following books, choosing between science fiction, fantasy, or neither. 

The Name of the Wind by Patrick Rothfuss, The Player of Games by Iain M. Banks, Crying in H Mart by Michelle Zauner, Crime and Punishment by Fyodr Dostoevsky, and Hyperion by Dan Simmons.
Short Summary about 2011 Cricket World Cup
Who were Fernando Pessoa's main heteronyms?
Why are cats better than dogs in some people's opinion?
Given a reference text that describes the air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption, how long was the air travel over Europe disrupted for?
Given the reference text about moths, what family does Bityla sericea belong to?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tan-tan, Ruan
In which European city would you find Orly airport?
Classify each as National Park in Utah or Arizona: Zion National Park, Bryce Canyon, Grand Canyon, Saguaro National Park
How to prepare without baking dessert recipe -Banana Pudding?
Write a short story about a cat named Bistro that is full of adventure.
what is elasticsearch?
Extract the names of all schools in the text
Tell me which of the following circumstances warrant calling 911: fridge runs out of food, micro kitchen runs out of slacks, someone gets hit by a car, a child is drowning in a public pool, your saving account runs out of money, someone carries assault weapons into campus.
What would cause stride scheduling to cause inefficiency in CPU operations?
What are some of the popular monuments in India?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Whip, Waldzither
Given this paragraph about Yahalom and his works, tell me when he was born?
Is the sum of an even number and an odd number even or odd?
What are some good places to go on a surf trip?
Who is the best soccer player in the world?
Write a rap about work
From the passage provided, extract the difference in caffeine between a light roast and a dark roast.
What are some low fat snack options?
Behind Delta tables is the data stored in Parquet file formats?
Is there any river that doesn’t meet a sea?
What does Midnight Sun mean?
How long is a marathon?
Tell if these are grown in trees or bushes: apples, strawberries, bananas, pineapples, coconut, raspberries, blueberries.
What are a couple of simple tricks to make a simple wood carving look more polished and professional?
Is Dirty picture a movie?
Extract all of the dates mentioned in this paragraph and list them using bullets in the format {Date} - {Description}
List down the key takeaways from the below paragraph on how Singapore growth is derived from its monetary policy
Who is the greatest basketball player of all time?
Provide three bullets about Einstein from this paragraph that does not relate to physics
Who was the original singer of Static-X?
What medicinal plants should I grow in my Mid-Atlantic garden?
Where did Alexander Digeon fought
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tassa, Sitar
Does Amazon use doors for desks?
How many world championships has Max Verstappen won?
What is the difference between solar power and hydrogen fuel cell?  What are the advantages of hydrogen?
Why is selling stocks short a high risk investment technique
Is there a movie about Wikipedia
Extract all the dates from this paragraph provided.
In which cities was the AFL Grand Final played during COVID-19 ?
Why do people like to live in Minnesota?
What are the most expensive cities in the world ?
Identify which instrument is string or percussion: Tap shoe, Sarod
Tell me which of the following countries as considered SAARC countries: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, United States of America, United Kingdom, China, Singapore
What are the 9 locations of Dick's Drive In restaurants?
Where is a good place to go on holiday in Cornwall, England?
When did Uber IPO?
Classify the below aircraft models based on the companies which created them.
Next-Generation 737, A220, 737 MAX, A350, A330, 747-8, 767, A320, 777, 777X, A380, 787
Extract some details about the company 'Bath & Body Works' from the given passage
Who was the last king of the Reach before Aegon's Conquest?
If you were the last person on Earth, what thoughts would you leave behind in a diary if future life were to find it?
are new year resolutions effective?
Hugh Lofting created which famous character
What are the different kinds of rock climbing?
How do I choose a new phone?
Classify the below car manufacturing companies based on their countries of origin.
Mazda, KIA, Hyundai, Ford, Honda, Toyota, Chevrolet
What is a world war and how many world wars have happened so far?
What is the name of the first dog that went to space?
Which nation placed its astronauts on the moon first?
What seven houses ruled the Seven Kingdoms before Aegon's Conquest?
What is the correlation between interest rates and bond prices?
Who directed Terror Mountain, a American silent Western film?
Will commercial space travel be affordable to me in my lifetime and what would I pay for it?
Give me a bulleted list of the the first five books in the bible new testament?
Classify these quarterback as either won Superbowl or did not win: Joe Montana, Dan Marino, Jim Kelly, John Elway.
Why is it important to brush and floss your teeth everyday?
What are some of the best places to eat in Boston?
How many types of cat does the world cat federation recognise?
Who wrote the Man in the Iron Mask
What is the history of coffee?
Imagine you are someone's shadow for a day. Write about your experiences in the present tense.
In the series A Song of Ice and Fire, who is the founder of House Redwyne?
When did Phil Knight announce he would step down as chairman of Nike
Who is the author of Harry Potter?
What is geomorphometry?
What does troll the respawn, Jeremy mean?
Who won the World Chess Championship in 2021?
Why is it a good idea to walk every day?
Who is the creator of Python?
What is a graph?
What are common florals found in Zigalga National Park?
Which is a species of fish? Banjo or Guitar
What is linux Bootloader
Tell me about the various road types in USA?
What is one-child policy?
How do i accept the change
What is a laser and who created it?
What is the difference between a road bike and a mountain bike?
How does GIS help in the real estate investment industry?
What is the Masters?
